=== Dental composite ===
Dental composite resins (better referred to as "resin-based composites" or simply "filled resins") are dental cements made of synthetic resins. Synthetic resins evolved as restorative materials since they were insoluble, of good tooth-like appearance, insensitive to dehydration, easy to manipulate and inexpensive. Composite resins are most commonly composed of Bis-GMA and other dimethacrylate monomers (TEGMA, UDMA, HDDMA), a filler material such as silica and in most applications, a photoinitiator. Dimethylglyoxime is also commonly added to achieve certain physical properties such as flow-ability. Further tailoring of physical properties is achieved by formulating unique concentrations of each constituent.
Many studies have compared the lesser longevity of resin-based composite restorations to the longevity of silver-mercury amalgam restorations. Depending on the skill of the dentist, patient characteristics and the type and location of damage, composite restorations can have similar longevity to amalgam restorations. (See Longevity and clinical performance.) In comparison to amalgam, the appearance of resin-based composite restorations is far superior.
Resin-based composites are on the World Health Organization's List of Essential Medicines.


== Hand Instrumentation and Formulas ==
In operative dentistry, precise cavity preparations rely on standard hand instruments designed according to G.V. Black’s hand instrument formula. Instruments are classified using either a 3-number or 4-number code stamped on the handle:First number: Width of the blade in tenths of a millimeter.Second number (4-number formula only): Primary cutting edge angle relative to the long axis of the handle, expressed in centigrades (where 100 centigrades = $360^\circ$). This angle is specifically kept $>50$ centigrades so that the blade remains sturdy and structurally sound during heavy cutting.Third number: Length of the blade in millimeters.Fourth number: Blade angle relative to the long axis of the handle, expressed in centigrades.


== History of use ==
Traditionally resin-based composites set by a chemical setting reaction through polymerization between two pastes. One paste containing an activator (not a tertiary amine, as these cause discolouration) and the other containing an initiator (benzoyl peroxide). To overcome the disadvantages of this method, such as a short working time, light-curing resin composites were introduced in the 1970s. The first light-curing units used ultra-violet light to set the material, however this method had a limited curing depth and was a high risk to patients and clinicians. Therefore, UV light-curing units were later replaced by visible light-curing systems employing camphorquinone as the photoinitiator.


=== Traditional period ===
In the late 1960s, composite resins were introduced as an alternative to silicates and unfulfilled resins, which were frequently used by clinicians at the time. Composite resins displayed superior qualities, in that they had better mechanical properties than silicates and unfulfilled resins. Composite resins were also seen to be beneficial in that the resin would be presented in paste form and, with convenient pressure or bulk insertion technique, would facilitate clinical handling. The faults with composite resins at this time were that they had poor appearance, poor marginal adaptation, difficulties with polishing, difficulty with adhesion to the tooth surface, and occasionally, loss of anatomical form.


=== Microfilled period ===
In 1978, various microfilled systems were introduced into the European market. These composite resins were appealing, in that they were capable of having an extremely smooth surface when finished. These microfilled composite resins also showed a better clinical colour stability and higher resistance to wear than conventional composites, which favoured their tooth tissue-like appearance as well as clinical effectiveness. However, further research showed a progressive weakness in the material over time, leading to micro-cracks and step-like material loss around the composite margin. In 1981, microfilled composites were improved remarkably with regard to marginal retention and adaptation. It was decided, after further research, that this type of composite could be used for most restorations provided the acid etch technique was used and a bonding agent was applied.


=== Hybrid period ===
Hybrid composites were introduced in the 1980s and are more commonly known as resin-modified glass ionomer cements (RMGICs). The material consists of a powder containing a radio-opaque fluoroaluminosilicate glass and a photoactive liquid contained in a dark bottle or capsule. The material was introduced, as resin composites on their own were not suitable for Class II cavities. RMGICs can be used instead. This mixture or resin and glass ionomer allows the material to be set by light activation (resin), allowing a longer working time. It also has the benefit of the glass ionomer component releasing fluoride and has superior adhesive properties. RMGICs are now recommended over traditional GICs for basing cavities. There is a great difference between the early and new hybrid composites.
Initially, resin-based composite restorations in dentistry were very prone to leakage and breakage due to weak compressive strength.  In the 1990s and 2000s, such composites were greatly improved and have a compression strength sufficient for use in posterior teeth.


== Method and clinical application ==
Today's composite resins have low polymerization shrinkage and low coefficients of thermal shrinkage, which allows them to be placed in bulk while maintaining good adaptation to cavity walls. The placement of composite requires meticulous attention to procedure or it may fail prematurely.  The tooth must be kept perfectly dry during placement or the resin will likely fail to adhere to the tooth.  Composites are placed while still in a soft, dough-like state, but when exposed to light of a certain blue wavelength (typically 470 nm), they polymerize and harden into the solid filling (for more information, see Light activated resin).  It is challenging to harden all of the composite, since the light often does not penetrate more than 2–3 mm into the composite. If too thick an amount of composite is placed in the tooth, the composite will remain partially soft, and this soft unpolymerized composite could ultimately lead to leaching of free monomers with potential toxicity and/or leakage of the bonded joint leading to recurring dental pathology. The dentist should place composite in a deep filling in numerous increments, curing each 2–3 mm section fully before adding the next. In addition, the clinician must be careful to adjust the bite of the composite filling, which can be tricky to do. If the filling is too high, even by a subtle amount, that could lead to chewing sensitivity on the tooth. A properly placed composite is comfortable, of good appearance, strong and durable, and could last 10 years or more.
The most desirable finish surface for a composite resin can be provided by aluminum oxide disks. Classically, Class III composite preparations were required to have retention points placed entirely in dentin. A syringe was used for placing composite resin because the possibility of trapping air in a restoration was minimized.  Modern techniques vary, but conventional wisdom states that because there have been great increases in bonding strength due to the use of dentin primers in the late 1990s, physical retention is not needed except for the most extreme of cases. Primers allow the dentin's collagen fibers to be "sandwiched" into the resin, resulting in a superior physical and chemical bond of the filling to the tooth. Indeed, composite usage was highly controversial in the dental field until primer technology was standardized in the mid to late 1990s.  The enamel margin of a composite resin preparation should be beveled in order to improve the appearance and expose the ends of the enamel rods for acid attack. The correct technique of enamel etching prior to placement of a composite resin restoration includes etching with 30%-50% phosphoric acid and rinsing thoroughly with water and drying with air only. In preparing a cavity for restoration with composite resin combined with an acid etch technique, all enamel cavosurface angles should be obtuse angles. Contraindications for composite include varnish and zinc oxide-eugenol. Composite resins for Class II restorations were not indicated because of excessive occlusal wear in the 1980s and early 1990s. Modern bonding techniques and the increasing unpopularity of amalgam filling material have made composites more attractive for Class II restorations.  Opinions vary, but composite is regarded as having adequate longevity and wear characteristics to be used for permanent Class II restorations. Whether composite materials last as long or have similar leakage and sensitivity properties when compared to Class II amalgam restorations was described as a matter of debate in 2008.


== Composition ==

As with other composite materials, a dental composite typically consists of a resin-based oligomer matrix, such as a bisphenol A-glycidyl methacrylate (BISGMA), urethane dimethacrylate (UDMA) or semi-crystalline polyceram (PEX), and an inorganic filler such as silicon dioxide (silica). Without a filler the resin wears easily, exhibits high shrinkage and is exothermic. Compositions vary widely, with proprietary mixes of resins forming the matrix, as well as engineered filler glasses and glass ceramics. The filler gives the composite greater strength, wear resistance, decreased polymerisation shrinkage, improved translucency, fluorescence and colour, and a reduced exothermic reaction on polymerisation. It also however causes the resin composite to become more brittle with an increased elastic modulus. Glass fillers are found in multiple different compositions allowing an improvement on the optical and mechanical properties of the material. Ceramic fillers include zirconia-silica and zirconium oxide.
Matrices such as BisHPPP and BBP, contained in the universal adhesive BiSGMA, have been demonstrated to increase the cariogenicity of bacteria leading to the occurrence of secondary caries at the composite-dentin interface. BisHPPP and BBP cause an increase of glycosyltransferase in S. mutans bacteria,  which results in increased production of sticky glucans that allow S.mutans' adherence to the tooth. This results in a cariogenic biofilms at the interface of composite and tooth. The cariogenic activity of bacteria increases with concentration of the matrix materials.  BisHPPP has furthermore been shown to regulate bacterial genes, making bacteria more cariogenic, thus compromising the longevity of composite restorations. Researchers are highlighting the need for new composite materials to be developed which eliminate the cariogenic products contained in composite resin and universal adhesives.
A coupling agent such as silane is used to enhance the bond between these two components. An initiator package (such as: camphorquinone (CQ), phenylpropanedione (PPD) or Lucirin (TPO)) begins the polymerization reaction of the resins when blue light is applied. Various additives can control the rate of reaction.


=== Filler types and particle size ===
Resin filler can be made of glasses or ceramics. Glass fillers are usually made of crystalline silica, silicon dioxide, lithium/barium-aluminium glass, and borosilicate glass containing zinc/strontium/lithium. Ceramic fillers are made of zirconia-silica, or zirconium oxide.
Fillers can be further subdivided based on their particle size and shapes such as:


==== Macrofilled filler ====
Macrofilled fillers have a particle size ranging from 5 - 10 μm. They have good mechanical strength but poor wear resistance. Final restoration is difficult to polish adequately leaving rough surfaces, and therefore this type of resin is plaque retentive.


==== Microfilled filler ====
Microfilled fillers are made of colloidal silica with a particle size of 0.4 μm. Resin with this type of filler is easier to polish compared to macrofilled. However, its mechanical properties are compromised as filler load is lower than in conventional (only 40-45% by weight). Therefore, it is contraindicated for load-bearing situations, and has poor wear resistance.


==== Hybrid filler ====
Hybrid filler contains particles of various sizes with filler load of 75-85% by weight. It was designed to get the benefits of both macrofilled and microfilled fillers. Resins with hybrid filler have reduced thermal expansion and higher mechanical strength. However, it has higher polymerisation shrinkage due to a larger volume of diluent monomer which controls viscosity of resin.


==== Nanofilled filler ====
Nanofilled composite has a filler particle size of 20-70 nm Nanoparticles form nanocluster units and act as a single unit. They have high mechanical strength similar to hybrid material, high wear resistance, and are easily polished. However, nanofilled resins are difficult to adapt to the cavity margins due to high volume of filler.


==== Bulk filler ====
Bulk filler is composed of non-agglomerated silica and zirconia particles. It has nanohybrid particles and filler load of 77% by weight. Designed to decrease clinical steps with possibility of light curing through 4-5mm incremental depth, and reduce stress within remaining tooth tissue. Unfortunately, it is not as strong in compression and has decreased wear resistance compared to conventional material. 
Recently, nanohybrid fillers have seen wide interest.


== Advantages ==
Advantages of composites:

Appearance: The main advantage of a direct dental composite over traditional materials such as amalgam is improved tooth tissue-mimicry. Composites can be in a wide range of tooth colors allowing near invisible restoration of teeth. Composite fillings can be closely matched to the color of existing teeth. Aesthetics are especially critical in anterior teeth region - see Aesthetic anterior composite restorations.
Bonding to tooth structure: Composite fillings micro-mechanically bond to tooth structure. This strengthens the tooth's structure and restores its original physical integrity. The discovery of acid etching (producing enamel irregularities ranging from 5-30 micrometers in depth) of teeth to allow a micro-mechanical bond to the tooth allows good adhesion of the restoration to the tooth. Very high bond strengths to tooth structure, both enamel and dentin, can be achieved with dentin bonding agents.
Tooth-sparing preparation: The fact that composite fillings are glued (bonded) to the tooth means that unlike amalgam fillings, there is no need for the dentist to create retentive features destroying healthy tooth. Unlike amalgam, which just fills a hole and relies on the geometry of the hole to retain the filling, composite materials are bonded to the tooth. In order to achieve the necessary geometry to retain an amalgam filling, the dentist may need to drill out a significant amount of healthy tooth material. In the case of a composite restoration, the geometry of the hole (or "box") is less important because a composite filling bonds to the tooth. Therefore less healthy tooth needs to be removed for a composite restoration.
Less-costly and more conservative alternative to dental crowns: In some situations, a composite restoration may be offered as a less-expensive (though possibly less durable) alternative to a dental crown, which can be a very expensive treatment. Installation of a dental crown usually requires removal of significant healthy tooth material so the crown can fit over or into the natural tooth. Composite restoration conserves more of the natural tooth.
Alternative to tooth removal: As a composite restoration bonds to the tooth and can restore the original physical integrity of a damaged or decayed tooth, in some cases composite restoration can preserve a tooth that might not be salvageable with amalgam restoration. For example, depending on the location and extent of decay, it might not be possible to create a void (a "box") of the geometry necessary to retain an amalgam filling.
Versatility: Composite fillings can be used to repair chipped, broken or worn teeth which would not be repairable using amalgam fillings.
Repairability: In many cases of minor damage to a composite filling, the damage can be easily repaired by adding additional composite. An amalgam filling might require complete replacement.
Longer working time: The light-curing composite allows the on-demand setting and longer working time to some degree for the operator compared to amalgam restoration.
Reduced quantity of mercury released to the environment: Composites avoid mercury environmental contamination associated with dentistry. When amalgam fillings are drilled for height adjustment, repair or replacement, some mercury-containing amalgam is inevitably washed down drains. (See Dental amalgam controversy - Environmental impact) When amalgam fillings are prepared by dentists, improperly disposed excess material may enter landfills or be incinerated. Cremation of bodies containing amalgam fillings releases mercury into the environment. (See Dental amalgam controversy - Cremation)
Reduced mercury exposure for dentists: Preparing new amalgam fillings and drilling into existing amalgam fillings exposes dentists to mercury vapor. Use of composite fillings avoids this risk, unless the procedure also involves removing an existing amalgam filling. A review article found studies indicating that dental work involving mercury may be an occupational hazard with respect to reproductive processes, glioblastoma (brain cancer), renal function changes, allergies and immunotoxicological effects. (See Dental amalgam controversy - Health effects for dentists)
Lack of corrosion: Although corrosion is no longer a major problem with amalgam fillings, resin composites do not corrode at all. (Low-copper amalgams, prevalent before 1963, were more subject to corrosion than modern high-copper amalgams. )


== Disadvantages ==
Composite shrinkage and secondary caries: In the past, composite resins suffered significant shrinkage during curing, which led to inferior bonding interface. Shrinkage permits microleakage, which, if not caught early, can cause secondary caries (subsequent decay), the most significant dental disadvantage of composite restoration. In a study of 1,748 restorations, risk of secondary caries in the composite group was 3.5 times risk of secondary caries in the amalgam group.  Good dental hygiene and regular checkups can mitigate this disadvantage. Most microhybrid and nanohybrid composites have a polymerization shrinkage that ranges from 2% to 3.5%. Composite shrinkage can be reduced by altering the molecular and bulk composition of the resin. In the field of dental restorative materials, reduction of composite shrinkage has been achieved with some success. Among the newest materials, silorane resin exhibits lower polymerization shrinkage, compared to the dimethacrylates.
Durability: In some situations, composite fillings may not last as long as amalgam fillings under the pressure of chewing, particularly if used for large cavities. (See Longevity and clinical performance, below.)
Chipping: Composite materials can chip off the tooth.
Skill and training required: Successful outcomes in direct composite fillings is related to the skills of the practitioner and technique of placement. For example, a rubber dam is rated as being important for achieving longevity and low fracture rates similar to amalgam in the more demanding proximal Class II cavities.
Need to keep working area in mouth completely dry: The prepared tooth must be completely dry (free of saliva and blood) when the resin material is being applied and cured. Posterior teeth (molars) are difficult to keep dry. Keeping the prepared tooth completely dry can also be difficult for any work involving treatment of cavities at or below the gumline, though techniques have been described to facilitate this.
Time and expense: Due to the sometimes complicated application procedures and the need to keep the prepared tooth absolutely dry, composite restorations may take up to 20 minutes longer than equivalent amalgam restorations. Longer time in the dental chair may test the patience of children, making the procedure more difficult for the dentist. Due to the longer time involved, the fee charged by a dentist for a composite restoration may be higher than for an amalgam restoration.
Costs: Composite restoration cases generally have limited insurance coverage. Some dental insurance plans may provide reimbursement for composite restoration only on front teeth where amalgam restorations would be particularly objectionable on cosmetic grounds. Thus, patients may be required to pay the entire charge for composite restorations on posterior teeth. For example one dental insurer states that most of their plans will pay for resin (i.e. composite) fillings only "on the teeth where their cosmetic benefit is critical: the six front teeth (incisors and cuspids) and on the facial (cheek side) surfaces of the next two teeth (bicuspids)." Even if charges are paid by private insurance or government programs, the higher cost is incorporated in dental insurance premiums or tax rates. In the UK, dental composites are not covered by NHS for the restoration of posterior teeth. Patients, therefore, may require to pay the entire charge of the treatment or have to pay according to the private charge rate.


== Direct dental composites ==
Direct dental composites are placed by the dentist in a clinical setting. Polymerization is accomplished typically with a hand held curing light that emits specific wavelengths keyed to the initiator and catalyst packages involved. When using a curing light, the light should be held as close to the resin surface as possible, a shield should be placed between the light tip and the operator's eyes. Curing time should be increased for darker resin shades. Light cured resins provide denser restoration than self-cured resins because no mixing is required that might introduce air bubble porosity.
Direct dental composites can be used for:

Filling cavity preparations
Filling gaps (diastemas) between teeth using a shell-like veneer or
Minor reshaping of teeth
Partial crowns on single teeth


=== Setting mechanisms of resin composite ===
Types of setting mechanisms:

Chemical cure (self-cure / dark cure)
Light cure
Dual cure (setting both chemically and by light)
Chemically cured resin composite is a two-paste system (base and catalyst) which starts to set when the base and the catalyst are mixed together.
Light cured resin composites contains a photo-initiator (e.g. camphorquinone) and an accelerator. The activator present in light activated composite is diethyl-amino-ethyl-methacrylate (amine) or diketone. They interact when exposed to light at wavelength of 400-500 nm, i.e., blue region of the visible light spectrum.  The composite sets when it is exposed to light energy at a set wavelength of light. Light cured resin composites are also sensitive to ambient light, and therefore, polymerisation can begin before use of the curing light.
Dual cured resin composite contains both photo-initiators and chemical accelerators, allowing the material to set even where there is insufficient light exposure for light curing.
Chemical polymerisation inhibitors (e.g. monomethyl ether of hydroquinone) are added to the resin composite to prevent polymerisation of the material during storage, increasing its shelf life.


=== Classification of resin composites according to handling characteristics ===
This classification divides resin composite into three broad categories based on their handling characteristics:

Universal: advocated for general use, oldest subtype of resin composite
Flowable: fluid consistency, used for very small restorations
Packable: stiffer, more viscous material used solely for posterior parts of the mouth
Manufacturers manipulate the handling characteristics by altering the constituents of the material. Generally, the stiffer materials (packable) exhibit a higher filler content whilst fluid materials (flowable) exhibit lower filler loading.
Universal:     
This is the traditional presentation of resin composites and performs well in many situations. However, their use is limited in specialised practice where more complex aesthetic treatments are undertaken. Indications include: the restoration of class I, II and III and IV where aesthetics is not paramount, and the repair of non-carious tooth surface loss (NCTSL) lesions. Contraindications include: restoration of ultraconservative cavities, in areas where aesthetics is critical, and where insufficient enamel is available for etching.
Flowable:
Flowable composites represent a relatively newer subset of resin-based composite material, dating back to the mid-1990s. Compared to universal composite, flowables have a reduced filler content (37–53%) thereby exhibiting ease of handling, lower viscosity, compressive strength, wear resistance and greater polymerisation shrinkage. Due to the poorer mechanical properties, flowable composites should be used with caution in high stress-bearing areas. However, due to its favourable wetting properties, it can adapt intimately to enamel and dentine surfaces. Indications include: restoration of small class I cavities, preventive resin restorations (PRR), fissure sealants, cavity liners, repair of deficient amalgam margins, and class V (abfraction) lesions caused by NCTSL. Contraindications include: in high stress-bearing areas, restoration of large multi-surface cavities, and if effective moisture control is unattainable.

Packable:
Packable composites were developed to be used in posterior situations. Unlike flowable composite, they exhibit a higher viscosity thereby necessitating greater force upon application to 'pack' the material into the prepared cavity. Their handling characteristics is more similar to dental amalgam, in that greater force is required to condense the material into the cavity. Therefore, they can be thought of as 'tooth-coloured amalgam'. The increased viscosity is achieved by a higher filler content (>60% by volume) – thereby making the material stiffer and more resistant to fracture, two properties that are ideal for materials to be used in the posterior region of the mouth. The disadvantage of the associated increased filler content is the potential risk of introducing voids along the cavity walls and between each layer of material. In order to seal any marginal deficiencies, the use of a single layer of flowable composite at the base of a cavity has been advocated when undertaking Class II posterior composite restorations when using packable composite.


== Indirect dental composites ==
Indirect composite is cured outside the mouth, in a processing unit that is capable of delivering higher intensities and levels of energy than handheld lights can. Indirect composites can have higher filler levels, are cured for longer times and curing shrinkage can be handled in a better way.
As a result, they are less prone to shrinkage stress and marginal gaps and have higher levels and depths of cure than direct composites. For example, an entire crown can be cured in a single process cycle in an extra-oral curing unit, compared to a millimeter layer of a filling.
As a result, full crowns and even bridges (replacing multiple teeth) can be fabricated with these systems.
Indirect dental composites can be used for:

Filling cavities in teeth, as fillings, inlays and/or onlays
Filling gaps (diastemas) between teeth using a shell-like veneer or
Reshaping of teeth
Full or partial crowns on single teeth
Bridges spanning 2-3 teeth
A stronger, tougher and more durable product is expected in principle. But in the case of inlays, not all clinical long-term-studies detect this advantage in clinical practice (see below).


== Mandibular Fracture Management in Edentulous Patients ==
Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery considerations for managing mandibular fractures vary significantly based on patient age, systemic health, and bone quality. In elderly, edentulous, diabetic patients, severe alveolar ridge resorption leads to reduced cross-sectional bone volume and compromised microvascular healing capacity.Gunning Splints: Traditional conservative management involves using Gunning splints (or modified existing dentures) secured with circummandibular and maxilla-wiring to achieve closed reduction and indirect skeletal fixation. This approach minimizes surgical trauma and avoids soft tissue reflection in medically complex patients, though it relies on patient compliance and sufficient ridge morphology.Rigid Internal Fixation (RIF): In cases of severe ridge atrophy (where bone height is $<10\text{ mm}$), open reduction with rigid internal fixation using load-bearing reconstruction plates is preferred. RIF provides immediate mechanical stability, prevents non-union due to poor intrinsic vascularity, and eliminates the need for prolonged intermaxillary fixation, which is advantageous for geriatric patients with systemic comorbidities like diabetes.


== Longevity and clinical performance ==


=== Direct composite vs amalgam ===
Clinical survival of composite restorations placed in posterior teeth are in the range of amalgam restorations, with some studies seeing a slightly lower 
or slightly higher survival time compared to amalgam restorations.
Improvements in composite technology and application technique make composites a very good alternative to amalgam, while use in large restorations and in cusp capping situations is still debated.
According to a 2012 review article by Demarco et al. covering 34 relevant clinical studies, "90% of the studies indicated that annual failure rates between 1% and 3% can be achieved with Class I and II posterior [rear tooth] composite restorations depending on the definition of failure, and on several factors such as tooth type and location, operator [dentist], and socioeconomic, demographic, and behavioral elements."  This compares to a 3% mean annual failure rate reported in a 2004 review article by Manhart et al. for amalgam restorations in posterior stress-bearing cavities.
The Demarco review found that the main reasons cited for failure of posterior composite restorations are secondary caries (i.e. cavities which develop subsequent to the restoration), fracture, and patient behavior, notably bruxism (grinding/clenching.) Causes of failure for amalgam restorations reported in the Manhart et al.review also include secondary caries, fracture (of the amalgam and/or the tooth), as well as cervical overhang and marginal ditching.  The Demarco et al. review of composite restoration studies noted that patient factors affect longevity of restorations: Compared to patients with generally good dental health, patients with poorer dental health (possibly due to poor dental hygiene, diet, genetics, frequency of dental checkups, etc.) experience higher rates of failure of composite restorations due to subsequent decay. Socioeconomic factors also play a role: "People who had always lived in the poorest stratus [sic][stratum?] of the population had more restoration failures than those who lived in the richest layer."
The definition of failure applied in clinical studies may affect the reported statistics. Demarco et al note: "Failed restorations or restorations presenting small defects are routinely treated by replacement by most clinicians. Because of this, for many years, the replacement of defective restorations has been reported as the most common treatment in general dental practice..." Demarco et al observe that when both repaired and replaced restorations were classified as failures in one study, the Annual Failure Rate was 1.9%. However, when repaired restorations were reclassified as successes instead of failures, the AFR decreased to 0.7%. Reclassifying repairable minor defects as successes rather than failures is justifiable: "When a restoration is replaced, a significant amount of sound tooth structure is removed and the preparation [i.e. hole] is enlarged". Applying the narrower definition of failure would improve the reported longevity of composite restorations: Composite restorations can often be easily repaired or extended without drilling out and replacing the entire filling. Resin composites will adhere to the tooth and to undamaged prior composite material. In contrast, amalgam fillings are held in place by the shape of the void being filled rather than by adhesion. This means that it is often necessary to drill out and replace an entire amalgam restoration rather than add to the remaining amalgam.


=== Direct vs indirect composites ===
It might be expected that the costlier indirect technique leads to a higher clinical performance, however this is not seen in all studies. A study conducted over the course of 11 years reports similar failure rates of direct composite fillings and indirect composite inlays. Another study concludes that although there is a lower failure rate of composite inlays it would be insignificant and anyway too small to justify the additional effort of the indirect technique.
Also in the case of ceramic inlays a significantly higher survival rate compared to composite direct fillings can not be detected.
In general, a clear superiority of tooth coloured inlays over composite direct fillings could not be established by the review literature (as of 2013).


== See also ==

Dental bonding
Dental sealants


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to Composite Fillings at Wikimedia Commons

=== Amalgam (dentistry) ===
In dentistry, amalgam is an alloy of mercury used to fill teeth cavities. It is made by mixing a combination of liquid mercury and particles of solid metals such as silver, copper or tin. The amalgam is mixed by the dentist just before use. It remains soft for a short while after mixing, which facilitates it being snugly packed into the cavity and shaped before it sets hard.
Dental amalgams were first documented in a Tang dynasty medical text written by Su Gong (苏恭) in 659, and appeared in Germany in 1528. In the 1800s, amalgam became the dental restorative material of choice due to its low cost, ease of application, strength, and durability.


== History of use ==
There are, according to Geir Bjørklund, indications that dental amalgam was used in the first part of the Tang dynasty in China (AD 618–907), and in Germany by Strockerus in about 1528. Evidence of a dental amalgam first appears in the Tang dynasty medical text Xinxiu bencao (新修本草) written by Su Gong (苏恭) in 659, manufactured from tin and silver. Historical records hint that the use of amalgams may date to even earlier in the Tang dynasty. It was during the Ming dynasty that the composition of an early dental amalgam was first published, and a text written by Liu Wentai in 1505 states that it consists of "100 shares of mercury, 45 shares of silver and 900 shares of tin."
Ever since its introduction in the Western world from 1818 and into the 1830s, amalgam has been the subject of recurrent controversies because of its mercury content. Early amalgam was made by mixing mercury with the filings of silver coins. In 1833, Polish dentists from London, Edward Crawcour and his nephew Moses Crawcour (incorrectly referred to as "the Crawcour Brothers"), brought amalgam to the United States; but they had to flee back to Europe one year later, leaving "a long trail of victimized patients and exasperated dentists" due to their malpractices.
However, the use of amalgam caught on in the following years, and in 1844 it was reported that fifty percent of all dental restorations placed in upstate New York consisted of amalgam. The same year, the use of dental amalgam was declared to be malpractice by the American Society of Dental Surgeons (ASDS), the only US dental association at the time, who forced all of its members to sign a pledge to abstain from using the mercury fillings. This was the beginning of what is known as the first dental amalgam war. The dispute ended in 1856 with the disbanding of the old association. The American Dental Association (ADA) was founded in its place in 1859, which has since then strongly defended dental amalgam from allegations of being too risky from the health standpoint.
The controversy about amalgam fillings continued throughout the rest of the nineteenth century, with regional dentist societies condemning them, such as the St. Louis Odontological Society did as early as 1867.


=== Low copper to high copper amalgam alloy ===
Amalgam has been used for many years for restorations, commonly known as fillings. Prior to 1900 many compositions were tried but few were successful when placed in the oral environment. Around 1900, small amounts of copper and occasionally zinc were added. Zinc acts as a scavenger because it prevents oxidation of the other metals in the alloy during the manufacturing process. Zinc accomplishes this by combining readily with oxygen to form zinc oxide. Amalgam restorations made from this balanced formula were reasonably successful and its longevity increased. However, one disadvantage that remained was fracture at the tooth-amalgam interface commonly called marginal fracture. Sn8Hg (γ2 phase) was considered to be responsible for this problem. This phase has been shown to be the weakest phase in the set amalgam and is subject to corrosion, particularly at the tooth-amalgam interface.
In 1962 a new amalgam alloy, called Dispersalloy, was introduced by William and Ralph Youdelis of Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. William was a metallurgist in the Faculty of Engineering at the University of Alberta. His younger brother Ralph was a 1955 graduate of the Faculty of Dentistry at the same university. William Youdelis added a spherical silver-copper eutectic particle to the traditional lathe-cut Ag3Sn particle in a ratio of 1:2. The mixture of these two types of particles is known as admix alloy. This alloy strengthened the set amalgam and reduced the γ2 phase (Sn8Hg). The increased copper in the silver-copper eutectic reacted preferentially with tin so that Sn8Hg could not form. Early results from the clinical use of this new amalgam showed an improvement in marginal integrity. Faculty members of the Department of Operative Dentistry at The University of Alberta Faculty of Dentistry conducted clinical trials on the new material. It was produced by a local Edmonton company, Western Metallurgical. Johnson & Johnson pharmaceuticals eventually purchased the patent from the Youdelis brothers. 10 years later, another alloy, called Tytin, was introduced by adding significant amount of Cu3Sn together with Ag3Sn, in the form of a unicompositional spherical particle to eliminate the  γ2  phase. Both of these relatively new alloys raised the copper content from 5%, present in the older balanced composition alloy, to about 13% for the newer alloys.


== Composition ==
Dental amalgam is produced by mixing liquid mercury with an alloy made of silver, tin, and copper solid particles. Small quantities of zinc, mercury and other metals may be present in some alloys. This combination of solid particles is known as amalgam alloy. The composition of the alloy particles are controlled by the ISO Standard (ISO 1559) for dental amalgam alloy in order to control properties of set amalgam such as corrosion and setting expansion. It is important to differentiate between dental amalgam and the amalgam alloy that is commercially produced and marketed as small filings, spheroid particles, or a combination of these, suitable for mixing with liquid mercury to produce the dental amalgam. Amalgam is used most commonly for direct, permanent, posterior restorations and for large foundation restorations, or cores, which are precursors to placing crowns.
The reaction between mercury and alloy when mixed together is termed an amalgamation reaction. It will result in the formation of a silver-grey workable mass which can be condensed into cavities. After condensing, the dental amalgam is shaped to generate the required anatomical features and then hardens with time. The standard composition of alloy prior to 1986 is referred to as conventional amalgam alloy. More recently (post-1986), there has been a change in the compositional standard of the alloy due to better understanding of structure-property relationships for the materials. Conventional amalgam alloy commonly consists of silver (~65%), tin (~29%), copper (~8%) and other trace metals; current amalgam alloy consists of silver (40%), tin (32%), copper (30%) and other metals.
Alloy powder is then mixed with liquid mercury to produce dental amalgam. Low-copper amalgam commonly consists of mercury (50%), silver (~22–32%), tin (~14%), zinc (~8%) and other trace metals.


== Metallurgy ==
To fabricate an amalgam filling, the dentist uses a mixing device to blend roughly equal parts (by mass) of shavings of a silver-base alloy with mercury until the shavings are thoroughly wetted. The silver alloy is typically 40–70% Ag, 25-29% Sn, 2–40% Cu and 0–2% Zn (when the alloy is formulated Zn is a scavenger and is mostly consumed during melting and lost as oxide). The dentist packs the plastic mass, before it sets, into the cavity. The amalgam expands ≈0.1% over 6–8 hours on setting.
The final structure is a metal matrix composite, where γ1, η and γ2 phases, are a matrix for unreacted original alloy, minus the fast-reacting β-phase and excess Sn.


== Properties ==
Amalgam is a mixture of two or more metals (alloy) with mercury which has been purified first by distillation to remove impurities. Major components of the alloy are silver, tin, and copper. The composition of the alloy powder is controlled by ISO standard for dental amalgam alloy (ISO 1559) to control the properties of amalgam.


=== Plastic deformation (creep) ===
Creep or plastic deformation happens when subjected to intra-oral stresses such as chewing or grinding. Creep causes the amalgam to flow and protrudes from the margin of the cavity forming unsupported edges. "Ditch" is formed around the margins of the amalgam restoration after fracture due to amalgam creep at the occlusal margins. The γ2 phase of amalgam is primarily responsible for high values of creep.


=== Corrosion ===

Corrosion occurs when an anode and cathode are set up in the presence of electrolytes, creating an electrolytic cell. The multiphase structure of dental amalgam can contribute as an anode or cathode with saliva as electrolytes. Corrosion may significantly affect the structure and mechanical properties of set dental amalgam. In conventional amalgam, γ2 phase is the most reactive and readily forms an anode. It will break down releasing corrosion products and mercury. Some of the mercury will combine rapidly with unreacted alloy and some will be ingested. The chances of ditching are further increased. Copper-enriched amalgams contain little or no γ2 phase. The copper–tin phase, which replaces γ2 in these materials, is still the most corrosion-prone phase in the amalgam. The corrosion however is still much lower than conventional amalgam.
In spite of that, it is thought that corrosion actually offers a clinical advantage. The corrosion products will gather at the tooth-amalgam interface and fill the microgap (marginal gap) which helps to decrease microleakage. Even so, there are no reports of increased marginal leakage for the copper-enriched amalgams indicating that sufficient quantities of corrosion product are produced to seal the margins.
Microleakage is the leakage of minute amounts of fluids, debris, and microorganisms through the microscopic space between a dental restoration and the adjacent surface of the cavity preparation. Microleakage can risk recurrent cavities.


=== Strength ===
An amalgam restoration develops its strength slowly and may take up to 24 hours or longer to reach a reasonably high value. At the time when the patient is dismissed from the surgery, typically some 15–20 minutes after placing the filling, the amalgam is relatively weak. Therefore, dentists need to instruct patients not to apply undue stress to their freshly placed amalgam fillings.
In addition, amalgam restorations are brittle and susceptible to corrosion.


== Reaction phases ==
γ  : Ag3Sn (mechanically the strongest)
γ1 : Ag2Hg3 (major matrix phase in set amalgam)
γ2 : Sn8Hg (weakest phase, corrodes easily)
β  : Ag5Sn
η' : Cu6Sn5
ε  : Cu3Sn
The alloys are broadly classified as low-copper (5% or less copper) and high-copper alloys (13% to 30% copper). The solid particles of the alloy are either spherical or irregularly shaped microspheres of various sizes or a combination of the two. The low-copper alloys have either irregular or spherical particles. High-copper alloys contain either spherical particles of the same composition (unicompositional) or a mixture of irregular and spherical particles of different or the same composition (admixed). The properties of set amalgam depends upon the alloy composition—particle size, shape and distribution—and heat treatment controls the characteristic properties of the amalgam.


=== Low copper alloy ===
During trituration, mercury diffuses into the silver-tin particles. Then, silver and tin dissolve, to a very limited extent, into the mercury. As this occurs, the particles become smaller. Because the solubility of both silver and tin in mercury is limited and because silver is much less soluble in mercury than is tin, silver precipitates out first as silver-mercury (γ1) followed by tin in the form of tin-mercury (γ2). The set amalgam consists of unreacted gamma particles surrounded by a matrix of gamma 1 and gamma 2. The amalgamation is summarised as follows:
Ag3Sn, Ag5Sn + Hg → Ag2Hg3 + Sn8Hg + Ag3Sn
i.e. (γ + β) + Hg → γ1 + γ2 +  γ


=== High copper alloy ===
In high copper alloy, copper is added to improve mechanical properties, resistance to corrosion and marginal integrity. The higher copper is supplied by either the silver-copper eutectic or the Cu3Sn (ε) phase. The fact that tin had a greater affinity for copper than for mercury meant that the gamma-2 phase was reduced or eliminated. This resulted in the dramatic improvement in physical properties. The higher copper content is supplied as two types:

High copper admix alloy (spherical particles of the silver-copper eutectic alloy to a low-copper lathe-cut alloy in a ratio of 1:2)
Uni/single-composition alloy


==== Admix alloy setting reaction ====
During trituration, the dissolved silver from the silver-tin particles reacts, as in low copper alloys, to form the γ1 phase. The dissolved tin migrates to the outside of the silver-copper particles to form Cu6Sn5, the eta prime (η′) phase of the copper-tin system. Thus, copper reacts with sufficient tin to prevent the formation of γ2. The amalgamation reaction may be simplified as follows (notice the absence of γ2 phase):
γ(Ag3Sn) + Ag-Cu (eutectic) + Hg → γ1 (Ag2Hg3)+ η ′ (Cu6Sn5)+ unreacted γ (Ag3Sn) + unreacted Ag-Cu (eutectic)


==== Uni/single composition alloy ====
Here, the alloy particles contain both Ag3Sn(γ) and Cu3Sn(ε), similar to the low-copper lathe-cut alloys, but with much greater amount of the Cu3Sn(ε) phase. These alloys are usually spherical. When liquid mercury is mixed with these alloys, it diffuses into the surface of these particles forming Ag2Hg3 as well as Cu6Sn5.
γ(Ag3Sn) + ɛ(Cu3Sn) + Hg → γ1 (Ag2Hg3) + η ′ (Cu6Sn5) + unreacted [γ (Ag3Sn)+ ɛ (Cu3Sn )]
The difference in eta prime phase of admixed alloy and unicomposition alloy is that in unicomposition alloy, Cu6Sn5 crystals are much larger and rod-shaped than those in admixed alloy. Copper added in unicomposition causes removal of the gamma2 phase.


=== Advantages of high copper compared to low copper alloy ===
Better corrosion resistance.
Less susceptible to creep.
Greater strength.
Less tarnish and corrosion.
Greater longevity.


== Amalgam vs. polymer resins ==
Amalgam is tolerant to a wide range of clinical placement conditions and moderately tolerant to the presence of moisture during placement. In contrast, the techniques for composite resin placement are more sensitive to many factors.
Mercury has properties of a bacteriostatic agent whereas certain methacrylate polymers (for example TEGMA, triethylene glycol methacrylate) composing the matrix of resin composites "encourages the growth of microorganisms". In the Casa Pia study in Portugal (1986–1989), 1,748 posterior restorations were placed and 177 (10.1%) of them failed during the course of the study. Recurrent marginal decay was the main reason for failure in both amalgam and composite restorations, accounting for 66% (32/48) and 88% (113/129), respectively. Polymerization shrinkage, the shrinkage that occurs during the composite curing process, has been implicated in a 2002 review of the literature  and a 2003 study as the primary reason for postoperative marginal leakage.
However, there is low-quality evidence in two studies  to suggest that resin composites lead to higher failure rates and risk of secondary caries than amalgam restorations.
Several reviews have been made by using database in the Cochrane Library where randomized controlled trials of few studies comparing dental resin composite with dental amalgams in permanent posterior teeth were compared. This review supports the fact that amalgam restorations are particularly useful and successful in parts of the world where amalgam is still the material of choice to restore posterior teeth with proximal caries. Though, there is insufficient evidence to support or refute any adverse effects amalgam may have on patients, new research is unlikely to change opinion on its safety and due to the decision for a global phase-down of amalgam (Minamata Convention on Mercury) general opinion on its safety is unlikely to change.
These are some of the reasons why amalgam has remained a superior restorative material over resin-base composites.  The New England Children's Amalgam Trial (NECAT), a randomized controlled trial, yielded results "consistent with previous reports suggesting that the longevity of amalgam is higher than that of resin-based compomer in primary teeth, according to a 2007 review of the study, with some similar claims in a 2003 paper, and composites in permanent teeth according to that 2007 review  and a paper from 1986. Compomers were seven times as likely to require replacement and composites were seven times as likely to require repair. There are circumstances in which composite serves better than amalgam. For example, when a more conservative preparation would be beneficial, composite is the recommended restorative material. These situations would include small occlusal restorations, in which amalgam would require the removal of more sound tooth structure, as well as in "enamel sites beyond the height of contour". For cosmetic purposes, composite is preferred when a restoration is required on an immediately visible portion of a tooth.


== Bonded amalgam ==
Dental amalgam does not by itself bond to tooth structure. This was recognized as a shortcoming by early practitioners such as Baldwin. He recommended that the prepared cavity be coated with zinc phosphate cement just prior to filling with amalgam, in order to improve the seal and retention. The practice did not become universally accepted and eventually fell into disuse. Until the 1980s, most amalgam restorations placed worldwide were done without adhesives, although in the 1970s a polycarboxylate-based adhesive liner was formulated specifically for this purpose  In the mid-1980s the first reports of the use of resins to bond amalgam to etched tooth structure, much like is done for composite resins, appeared in the literature. Since then, a number of papers have been published on laboratory as well as clinical studies of the technique. For large cavity restorations, features such as pins, slots, holes and grooves can be used for the retention of large amalgam restorations, but they do not reinforce the amalgam or increase its strength.
There is no current scientific evidence to justify the extra cost and effort associated with the use of adhesively bonded amalgam restorations in comparison with nonbonded amalgam restorations. In view of the lack of evidence on the additional benefit of adhesively bonding amalgam compared with nonbonded amalgam, it is important that clinicians are mindful of the additional costs that may be incurred.


=== Liners and bases ===
The placement of amalgam restorations can potentially cause sensitivity post-operatively. According to R. Weiner, a protective layer or liner should be placed prior to the placement of amalgam to act as a buffer, helping to reduce sensitivity to the tooth. There are different liners that can be used in dental practices today, many of which contain zinc. Examples of lining materials include zinc oxide eugenol, zinc phosphate, glass ionomer cement, zinc poly-carboxylate and resin.


== Sealing amalgam restorations ==
A varnish can be applied to the cavity wall to provide a good marginal seal. The varnish should be insoluble in water and is usually composed of a resin in a volatile solvent. When applied to the cavity, the solvent evaporates, leaving the resin behind to seal the dentinal tubules. The amalgam can then be packed into the cavity.


== Dental amalgam toxicity ==

Concerns have been raised about the potential for mercury poisoning with dental amalgam when used  in a dental filling. Major health and professional organizations regard amalgam as safe but questions have been raised and acute but rare allergic reactions have been reported.
Critics argue that it has toxic effects that make it unsafe, both for the patient and perhaps even more so for the dental professional manipulating it during a restoration. A study by the Life Sciences Research Office found that studies on mercury vapor and dental amalgam "provided insufficient information to enable definitive conclusions." They identified several "research gaps", including: "well-controlled studies using standardized measures that evaluate whether low level [mercury vapor exposures] produce neurotoxic and/or neuropsychological effect", studies on "co-exposure to Hg0 and methylmercury", studies on "in utero exposure to Hg0" (elemental mercury), "occupational studies on [pregnant workers] with well-defined Hg0 exposure", studies on the absorption of Hg2+ by the "human neonatal gut from breast milk", studies on "whether dental professionals have increased incidences of kidney disease, emotional instability, erethism, pulmonary dysfunction, or other characteristics of occupational Hg0 exposure", studies on whether there exist "potential gender differences" or "genetic basis for sensitivity to mercury exposure." The removal of amalgam fillings is not recommended for reasons other than a true hypersensitivity to mercury. Mercury levels in blood and urine have been shown to rise for a short period of time following the removal of amalgam restorations and no studies have demonstrated any health gain from restoration removal. Removal involves exposure to mercury vapor released during the removal process. Amalgams also contribute to mercury toxicity in the environment. With regard to amalgam placement and removal in pregnancy, research has not shown any adverse effects for the mother or fetus. However, research is inadequate to determine the chance of harm occurring and therefore placement and removal should be avoided during pregnancy if possible.
In response to The Minamata Convention on Mercury, the European Commission has confirmed its position that individual nations should work to gradually scale down the use of dental amalgam.
In July 2018 the EU, "in consideration of the persistent pollution and environmental toxicity of amalgam's mercury", prohibited amalgam for dental treatment of children under 15 years and of pregnant or breastfeeding women.


== Environmental impact and prevention of amalgam poisoning ==
Dental amalgam is thought to be relatively safe to be used as a restorative material as it is used in low doses. Amalgam vapour can be released through chewing but this is minimal. However, there is an increased release of mercury following the exposure of electromagnetic fields generated by MRI machines, although the small amount released is not thought to pose a risk to health. Some patients may develop allergic reactions to it. Resin composite, glass ionomer cements and ceramic or gold inlays can be used as alternatives to amalgam.


=== U.S. amalgam disposal regulation ===

In the United States, dental offices have typically disposed of amalgam waste down the drain. The wastewater is sent to the local sewage treatment plant, which is not designed to treat or recycle mercury or other heavy metals. The mercury contaminates the sludge processed at the treatment plant, and thereby can spread the mercury in surrounding communities, if the sludge is land-applied for disposal. Dental amalgam is the largest source of mercury received by U.S. treatment plants.
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) promulgated an effluent guidelines regulation in 2017 which prohibits most dental practices from disposing dental amalgam waste down the drain. Most dental offices in the U.S. are required to use an amalgam separator in their drain system. The separator captures the waste material, which is then recycled.


=== EU amalgam disposal regulation ===
The European Commission has issued a Waste Directive that classifies amalgam waste as a hazardous waste. The waste should be separated from other waste by fitting amalgam separators in all dental practices.


=== Avoidance in pregnant women ===
Mercury can cross the placenta leading to stillbirths and birth defects. Although there is no evidence linking amalgam use and pregnancy damage, it is advisable to delay or avoid dealing with amalgam fillings in pregnant patients.
In July 2018 the EU prohibited amalgam for dental treatment of children under 15 years and of pregnant or breastfeeding women unless use of amalgam is medically indicated. There is no hint for a toxicity for the embryo of pregnant women. In addition, there is no scientific reason for avoiding amalgam for breastfeeding women. As the milk teeth won't remain for long, the avoidance of amalgam for children is driving by environmental considerations.


=== Awareness among dentists ===
The dental operating team should deal with amalgam with proper use of personal protective equipment to protect themselves. A popular methodology for removal and replacement is the Safe Mercury Amalgam Removal Technique or S.M.A.R.T. protocol.


=== Oral lesions ===
Some individuals have a sensitivity to amalgam and may develop oral lesions in which case a change of filling type is recommended.


== References ==


== External links ==

Position Paper on Amalgam Fillings Archived 12 May 2008 at the Wayback Machine, National Council Against Health Fraud
Composite Fillings - Tooth-Colored Fillings, American Dental Association
Amalgam Archives at Listserv.dfn.de (Forum)

=== Removable partial denture ===
A removable partial denture (RPD) is a denture for a partially edentulous patient who desires to have replacement teeth for functional or aesthetic reasons and who cannot have a bridge (a fixed partial denture) for any reason, such as a lack of required teeth to serve as support for a bridge (i.e. distal abutments) or financial limitations.
This type of prosthesis is referred to as a removable partial denture because patients can remove and reinsert it when required without professional help. Conversely, a "fixed" prosthesis can and should be removed only by a dental professional.
The aim of an RPD is to restore masticatory function, speech, appearance and other anatomical features.


== Usage ==
RPD may be used when there is a lack of required teeth to serve as support for a bridge (i.e. distal abutments) or financial limitations.  A single-tooth RPD known as a "flipper tooth" may be used temporarily after a tooth is extracted, during the several months it takes to complete the placement of a dental implant and crown.
Advantages of using RPD include:

Reduced encroachment on existing teeth
Replacement of a greater number of missing teeth
Easily removed for cleaning and hygiene maintenance
Fairly simple to fix/replace the prosthesis if damaged
Modifications can be made to the prosthesis in some cases following additional tooth loss
Disadvantages of using RPD include:

Limited stability whilst in function
Significant coverage even in cases where few teeth require replacement in order to maximise retention
Visible components depending on teeth needing replacement
Potential risk to the health of remaining teeth due to plaque accumulation or trauma


== Classification ==

The patient's oral condition is categorized based on the remaining dentition in a classification first proposed by Dr. Edward Kennedy in 1925. His classification consisted of four general outlines for partially edentulous arches that can present within a patient, which then could be treated with an RPD. When there is an edentulous space that is outside of the four classifications, it is termed a modification space. The use of this classification allows for easier communication between dental professionals, allows for easily visualization of the arch, and distinguishes a tooth-borne or tissue-supported RPD.

Class I  (bilateral free ended partially edentulous)
Class II (unilateral free ended partially edentulous)
Class III (unilateral bounded partially edentulous)
Class IV (bilateral bounded anterior partially edentulous)
Kennedy Class I RPDs are fabricated for people who are missing some or all of their posterior teeth on both sides (left and right) in a single arch (either mandibular or maxillary), and there are no teeth posterior to the edentulous area. In other words, Class I RPDs clasp onto teeth that are more towards the front of the mouth, while replacing the missing posterior teeth on both sides with false denture teeth. The denture teeth are composed of either plastic or porcelain.
Class II RPDs are fabricated for people who are missing some or all of their posterior teeth on one side (left or right) in a single arch, and there are no teeth behind the edentulous area. Thus, Class II RPDs clasp onto teeth that are more towards the front of the mouth, as well as on teeth that are more towards the back of the mouth of the side on which teeth are not missing, while replacing the missing more-back-of-the-mouth teeth on one side with false denture teeth.
Class III RPDs are fabricated for people who are missing some teeth in such a way that the edentulous area has teeth remaining both posterior and anterior to it. Unlike Class I and Class II RPDs which are both tooth-and-tissue-borne (meaning they both clasp onto teeth, as well as rest on the posterior edentulous area for support), Class III RPDs are strictly tooth-borne, which means they only clasp onto teeth and do not need to rest on the tissue for added support. This makes Class III RPDs exceedingly more secure as per the three rules of removable prostheses that will be mentioned later, namely: support, stability and retention. (See the article on dentures for a more thorough review of these three fundamentals of removable prosthodontics.)
However, if the edentulous area described in the previous paragraph crosses the anterior midline (that is, at least both central incisors are missing), the RPD is classified as a Class IV RPD. By definition, a Kennedy Class IV RPD design will possess only one edentulous area.
Class I, II and III RPDs that have multiple edentulous areas in which replacement teeth are being placed are further classified with modification states that were defined by Oliver C. Applegate. Kennedy classification is governed by the most posterior edentulous area that is being restored. Thus if, for example, a maxillary arch is missing teeth #1, 3, 7-10 and 16, the RPD would be Kennedy Class III mod 1. It would not be Class I, because missing third molars are generally not restored in an RPD (although if they were, the classification would indeed be Class I), and it would not be Class IV, because modification spaces are not allowed for Kennedy Class IV.
The results of a study conducted in Saudi Arabia,  showed that the occurrence of Kennedy Class III partial edentulism was 67.2% in the maxillary arch and 64.1% in the mandibular arch. Followed by Class II in both maxillary and mandibular arch with an average of 16.3% in maxillary arch and 14.8% in the mandibular arch. Based on these results, class III has the highest prevalence in younger group of patient  (31– 40 years). Class I and class II have the highest incidence among older group of patients (41–50 years).


== Design ==
Prior to designing partial dentures a complete examination is undertaken to assess the condition of remaining teeth. This may involve radiographs, sensibility testing or other assessments. From this examination and assessment of occlusion (occlusal plane, drifting, tilting of teeth and surveyed articulated casts) the designing of partial dentures can begin. Information from previous dentures can be very useful in deciding which features to keep the same and which features of the design to change – in the hope of making an improvement.


=== Stages of partial denture design ===
A systematic design process should be followed:

The teeth to be replaced must be decided.
The soft tissue to be replaced (flange) is then drawn.
The major connector is selected from a list of options (the options available will depend on the above assessment).
Retentive features of the denture must be decided – these may include clasps, guide planes and indirect retention (often important in dentures involving Kennedy Class 1 and Class 2 saddles).
Supportive features are then decided – these prevent the denture sinking into the soft tissue; often the natural teeth can take some of the loading (rest seats and connector coverage).
However, this is not always possible. Support may thus be tooth-borne, mucosal borne or a combination of tooth and mucosal borne.

The denture should where possible have features that withstand horizontal movement (bracing) and the clasps should have appropriate reciprocation.
The denture base material (usually acrylic or cobalt-chromium) and materials of the various components must be selected.
The hygiene of the prosthesis must be appropriate trying where possible to minimise the soft tissues coverage.
The design should be reviewed and simplified removing unnecessary components.
Once the partial denture has been designed, the shade and mould of the replacement teeth can be selected. Within the design process (and prior to the master impression stage of denture construction), modifications may be suggested to teeth. This may be undertaken to create occlusal space for rest seats or to create undercuts for the placement of clasps (such as addition of composite resin) or to create guide planes for easier insertion and removal of the denture.


== Components ==

Rather than lying entirely on the edentulous ridge like complete dentures, removable partial dentures possess clasps of cobalt-chrome or titanium metal or plastic that "clip" onto the remaining teeth, making the RPD more stable and retentive.
The parts of an RPD can be listed as follows (and are exemplified by the picture above):

Major connector (The thick metal "U" in the RPD image above is a lingual bar, a type of major connector)
Anterior-posterior palatal strap
Single palatal strap
U-shaped palatal connector (Horseshoe)
Lingual bar
Lingual plate
Minor connector (See the small struts protruding from the lingual bar at roughly 90 degree angles.)
Direct retainer (Examples are in the upper left of upper photo and lower right of lower photo; the clasp arms act to hug the teeth and keep the RPD in place.  The metal clasp and rest immediately adjacent to the denture teeth is also a direct retainer.)
Indirect retainer (An example is the little metal piece coming off the "U" at a 90 degree angle near the top of the upper photo, which is a cingulum rest on a canine.)
Physical retainer (This is a mesh of metal that allows the pink base material to connect to the metal framework of the RPD. Some consider physical retainers their own component (making a total of seven), while others consider them within the indirect retainer category (thus making a total of six components.)
Base (the pink material, mimicking gingiva)
Teeth (plastic or porcelain formed in the shape of teeth)


=== Major connectors for upper teeth ===

There are many options for major connectors for removable upper partial dentures. The type of connector used will vary depending on the specific circumstances and the results of a comprehensive examination and discussion with the patient. Commonly used major connectors are outlined in the table below along with details of factors affecting the choice of using them.


==== Plate ====
Advantages of plates are that they are useful when several teeth are missing or there are multiple saddle. They also provide more retention, stability and support due to larger palatal coverage. Plates are useful when there are long distal extensions. 
Disadvantages of plates are that they overs a lot of patients mouth so sometimes not well tolerated and also may affect phonetics. Plates can be problematic if there is a torus palatinus.


==== Palatal bar (Strap/Anterior-Posterior) ====
Advantages of these are their rigidity and minimal soft tissue coverage yet still having good resistance to deformation. A-P strap useful for Kennedy class I and II or if there is a torus. A-P strap gives greater distribution of stresses.
Disadvantages of these are that there is not much support due to less palatal coverage and also that is it bulky and so disliked by some patients.


==== U-shaped palatal bar (horseshoe connector) ====
Advantages of these are that they are useful in cases where we do not want to cover much of the palate e.g. if patient has a strong gag reflex, a large palatal torus or Kennedy class III.
Disadvantages of these are that they are flexible due to distal extensions which can have adverse effects on force transmission to abutment teeth. They can traumatic to the residual ridge.


==== Spoon denture ====
Advantages of these are that they are useful in small  anterior saddles and are cheap to make.
Disadvantages of these are that they have large palatal coverage for a small saddle.


==== Palatal Strap/Bar (Single/Anterior, mid or Posterior) ====
Advantages of these are that single strap is useful for Kennedy class III and IV cases.
Disadvantage of these are that single strap requires careful  placement  if there is a torus palatinus. They are generally inappropriate for Kennedy Class 1 or 2.


=== Major connectors for lower teeth ===

A major connector is the part of a partial denture that links components on one side of the arch with those on the other. It must be strong and rigid enough to provide a suitable skeleton to the prosthesis and located so as not to damage the gingival or movable tissues. Five types of major connectors are listed below:


==== Lingual bar ====
A lingual bar has a pear-shaped cross section tapering towards the gingival boundary. It should be positioned high enough so as to not irritate the lower movable tissue but low enough to allow for a substantial quantity of material to be used to ensure stiffness. At least 7mm of space is usually required. It sits on the soft tissue posteriorly to the dentition. Along with the lingual plate it is the most commonly used type of connector in the lower arch.
A lingual bar is more hygienic than a lingual plate but is difficult to add to if teeth are later extracted and require to be added to the denture.


==== Sublingual bar ====
A sublingual bar is similar to a lingual bar but is located on the floor of the mouth posteriorly and inferiorly to its usual location. They are used when the superior border of a lingual bar would be positioned too closely to the gingival border. They are contraindicated in patients with a high lingual frenum and in situations where they may interfere with tongue movements.


==== Lingual Plate ====
A lingual plate is a thin plate contoured to the lingual surfaces of the lower anterior teeth. A lingual plate is useful when there is insufficient space for a lingual bar which would result in irritation of the gingival boundary.
If the teeth are spaced out and the patient does not wish for visible metal to be seen then an interrupted lingual plate may be used where the material is cut away where it would be visible anteriorly.
A disadvantage of a lingual plate is that it covers a lot of gingival margins and is less hygienic than a lingual bar. It should be used with caution in those patients with a high caries rate. A major advantage is that is easier to add teeth to a denture with a lingual plate than a lingual bar connector. In addition, it is useful in providing some additional support for mobile lower anterior teeth.


==== Buccal bar ====
In rare cases where the inclination of the remaining anterior teeth is problematic and the use of a lingual connector inappropriate, a buccal bar can be considered.  


==== Continuous clasp ====
A continuous clasp is sometimes used in addition to a lingual bar and rarely as a sole major connector. It involves a bar of material placed along the cingulum of the anterior dentition.
The continuous clasp has the added advantage of providing indirect retention when used in addition to a lingual bar. It may be used when a lingual plate is compromising aesthetics.


== Support ==
Components that prevents displacement of the denture towards the tissues
If the denture solely rests on the remaining teeth, it is termed ‘tooth borne’, and if the denture lies solely on the mucoperiosteum, it is termed ‘mucosa borne’. In some cases where parts of the denture lies on periosteum and parts on the remaining teeth, it is called ‘tooth and mucosa borne’
‘Tooth borne’ dentures offer ideal tooth support, as the force is transmitted down the long axis of the tooth into the periodontal ligament. This will allow the dentures to feel like natural dentition, therefore feel more comfortable for the patient. The soft tissues are protected and resorption of the alveolar bone at the saddle areas is likely to be slow.
However, with ‘mucosa borne’ dentures. Force placed on these areas dissipates into the alveolar bone and will cause resorption over time. Dentures quickly begin to feel ill fitting as the shape of the alveolar ridge changes. 


=== Tooth born/ tooth and mucosa borne ===
When choosing the teeth to support the denture, They must have the following qualities. 

as close to the saddle as possible
healthy teeth
healthy periodontal status
large surface area of the roots
We place rests on the teeth for support.
Types of rests include:

occlusal
cingulum
incisal
Rests placed on teeth must be an adequate size and thickness to ensure the occlusal load is directed down the long axis of the tooth, without impinging on the patient's occlusion. A periodontally healthy tooth will be able to sustain its own load in addition to 1.5 similar teeth.


=== Mucosa borne ===
Dentures covering a larger area spreads the load, reducing the magnitude of force placed on the mucosa, reducing the rate of resorption.


== Clasp design ==
Direct retainers may come in various designs:

Cast circumferential clasp (suprabulge)
Akers'
Half and half
Back-action
Ring clasp
Wrought wire clasp
Roach clasp (infrabulge)
I-bar
T-bar
Y-bar
7-bar
Flexible Clasp, such as Valplast and others, have become more popular due to their tissue color and comfort against porcelain abutments. These may be incorporated with these traditional metal designs or instead of any metal supports with caution and some limitations. A unilateral flexible partial called a Nesbit can be incorporated instead of fixed bridges with some success and significantly less cost.
Both cast circumferential and wrought wire clasps are supra bulge clasps, in that they engage an undercut on the tooth by originating coronal to the height of contour, while Roach clasps are infrabulge clasps and engage undercuts by approaching from the gingival.
In addition there are a couple of specific theories which include the clasp design:

RPI: mesial rest, distolingual guide plate, I-bar
The RPI design was made for clasping a bilateral free end extension. These clasps are unique because they have to take into account extra torque force due to being tissue borne (and not tooth borne) at the posterior.
Described by Kratochvil in 1963 and modified by Krol in 1973
Kratochvil designed the abutment tooth with a long rest (from the mesial marginal ridge to the distal pit), long guide plane, and a regular I-bar clasp.
Krol modified this design with a short occlusal rest, short guide plane (touching only from occlusal to middle third), and a mesial-shifted I-bar. The theory behind Krol's decision was to allow for movement of the partial denture without placing too much torque on the abutment tooth.
An illustration of the RPI design function
RPA: mesial rest, distolingual guide plate, Akers' clasp-style retentive arm
RPC: mesial rest, distolingual guide plate, other type of cast circumferential clasp
So named in response to the RPI Philosophy introduced by Kratochvil and Kroll


== Indirect retention ==
 Indirect retention is required to prevent displacement of saddles, such as free-end saddles or anterior saddle which is curved outside a straight line between the abutment teeth. Such indirect retention can only be achieved where both claps and rests work together to form lever system (Class III lever system) to retain the free part of denture.


== References ==

Citations

Bibliography

=== Endodontics ===
Endodontics (from Greek  endo- 'inside' and  odont- 'tooth') is the dental specialty concerned with the study and treatment of the dental pulp.


== Overview ==
Endodontics encompasses the study (practice) of the basic and clinical sciences of normal dental pulp, the etiology, diagnosis, prevention, and treatment of diseases and injuries of the dental pulp along with associated periradicular conditions.
In clinical terms, endodontics involves either preserving part, or all of the dental pulp in health, or removing all of the pulp in irreversible disease. This includes teeth with irreversibly inflamed and infected pulpal tissue. Not only does endodontics involve treatment when a dental pulp is present, but also includes preserving teeth which have failed to respond to non-surgical endodontic treatment, or for teeth that have developed new lesions, e.g., when root canal re-treatment is required, or periradicular surgery.
Endodontic treatment is one of the most common procedures. If the dental pulp (containing nerves, arterioles, venules, lymphatic tissue, and fibrous tissue) becomes diseased or injured, endodontic treatment is required to save the tooth.


== Procedures ==


=== Root canal treatment ===

Root canal treatment is a dental procedure used to treat infected tooth pulp which would be otherwise extracted. The pulp is the soft tissue core of the tooth which contains nerves, blood supply and connective tissue necessary for tooth health. This is usually caused when bacteria enter the pulp through a deep cavity or failed filling.
Root canal treatment is required when the dental pulp is irreversibly damaged and involves both coronal and apical pulp. Root canal treatment can also be carried out on teeth with doubtful pulpal state before placing post-retained crowns and overdentures. Root canal therapy is not only performed when pain relief from an infected or inflamed pulp is required, it is also done to prevent adverse signs and symptoms from the surrounding sequelae and promote the healing and repair of the surrounding periradicular tissues. An example of this is if there is trauma to a front tooth which has caused it to be avulsed from the bony socket; endodontic treatment is required following re-implantation to preserve the aesthetics and function of the tooth, even though there may be no adverse symptoms of the dental pulp, or pain present at the time.
Prior to root canal treatment, clinical examination and radiographic examinations are carried out to diagnose and plan treatment. Local anaesthesia is delivered to make the procedure pain free. The tooth to be treated is then isolated using a rubber dam, which prevents saliva entering the tooth during treatment and protects the airway from the fine files and strong chemicals used. The root canal treatment procedure can be carried out over single or multiple appointments. Root canal treatment involves:

Removing the damaged and infected pulp
Shaping the entire root canal system
Cleaning and disinfecting the entire root canal system
Filling and sealing the root canal system
Placing a direct restoration such as composite filling or indirect restoration such as a crown
Instrument fractures are common procedural mishaps in root canal treatment. It is essential to prevent instrument fractures. The success of removing a broken instrument depends on the location, direction and type of instrument. A sodium hypochlorite accident can result in long-term functional and aesthetic complications. Extrusion of sodium hypochlorite irrigating solution during a root canal procedure can cause a severe inflammatory reaction and tissue damage. Treatment is provided based on the severity of the injury.  Tooth discolouration as a result of root canal treatment can occur if the pulpal tissue remnants are not completely removed or if a root canal sealer material containing silver is used.


=== Periradicular surgery ===

Periradicular surgeries involve the root surface. These include apicoectomy (removal of a root end), root resection (removal of an entire root), repair of an injured root due to perforation or resorption, removal of broken fragments of the tooth or a filling material, and exploratory surgery to look for root fractures.


==== Apicoectomy ====

An apicoectomy is a surgical procedure through which the apex of a root is resected, and a root-end filling is placed, preventing bacterial leakage into the root canal system from the periradicular tissues. A microsurgical technique is used to carry out apicoectomy, which improves post-operative healing.
An apicoectomy can be carried out when a previous root canal treatment fails, and re-root canal treatment is not possible. This may be as a result of anatomical features, such as root dilaceration, which can compromise the completion of cleaning and obturating the root canal system. Procedural errors, including ledges or perforations, may also be indications for an apicectomy.
Local anaesthetic is utilised to achieve anaesthesia as well as haemostasis for improved visualisation. A flap in the gum is designed, and then raised to allow for exposure of the periapical lesion. Bone removal (osteotomy) is carried out to enable access to root apex, and diseased tissue is removed at this point through curettage. The root end resection is carried out, removing 3mm apically. The canal(s) is then obturated, and the flap is sutured. There are a number of root-end filling materials available, including zinc oxide eugenol cements, and mineral trioxide aggregate.
Complications that may arise include:

pain: anti-inflammatory agents or analgesics should be taken
swelling: intermittent ice will aid in eradicating this. Swelling resolves usually within 24–48 hours.
ecchymosis (discolouration): this will often occur distant from the surgical site
paraesthesia: usually transient as a result of inflammatory swelling, and sensation will return to normal in 4 weeks
serious infection is rare, but can be treated with antibiotics, which should be administered with caution to avoid bacterial resistance 
maxillary sinus perforation 


=== Other procedures ===
Other non-surgical endodontic procedures include pulp capping, pulpotomy, apexification, and pulpal regeneration. Hemisection, where a root and its overlying portion of the crown are separated from the rest of the tooth and optionally removed, is another (non-periradicular) endodontic surgery.


== Tools ==
Microsurgical endodontics, the use of magnification devices such as microscopes, and dental loupes, has been widely accepted among endodontists and practitioners; its use is believed to increase accuracy and visualization in the operating field.  However, a Cochrane review in 2015 found no evidence to determine whether there is a difference in the outcome of a procedure done by magnification devices or a conventional procedure done with no magnification. The American Association of Endodontists strongly encourages its members to pursue the use of an oral microscope to ensure the highest level of excellence.
The use of a CBCT is also becoming the standard of care.


== Training ==
Endodontists are specialist dentists with additional training, experience and formal qualifications in endodontic treatment, apicectomies, microsurgery, and dental emergency and trauma management. Endodontics is recognized as a specialty by many national dental organizations including the Dental Board of Australia, British General Dental Council, American Dental Association, Royal College of Dentists of Canada, Indian Dental Association, and Royal Australasian College of Dental Surgeons.
Training programs such as those offered by reputable dental centers, including Laguna Dental Center, help foster skills in advanced procedures and patient care, including the diagnosis and management of complex cases.


=== Australia ===
In Australia, endodontics is recognized as one of the thirteen registered dental specialties. In addition to a dental degree, endodontists have an additional three years of postgraduate University training in the area of endodontics to be recognized and registered by the Dental Board of Australia. A general dentist is permitted to perform endodontic treatment, but must be competent in the skills required for the treatment and refer complex cases for specialist management.


=== United States ===
In the United States after finishing a dental degree, a dentist must undergo 2–3 additional years of postgraduate training to become an endodontist. American Dental Association (ADA) accredited programs are a minimum of two years in length. Following successful completion of this training, the dentist becomes eligible to sit for the American Board Of Endodontology examination. Successful completion of board certification results in Diplomate status in the American Board of Endodontics.
Although general dentists can perform endodontic treatment, there are several things which set endodontists apart. Endodontists use microscopes during treatment to better treat the small internal anatomy of teeth without taking away too much tooth structure, or causing iatrogenic damage. Also, endodontists use CBCT (3D imaging) to assess case difficulty and for diagnosis and treatment planning of endodontic cases.


== See also ==

American Association of Endodontists
Dental implant
Endodontic therapy
Journal of Endodontics
Oral and maxillofacial surgery
Ralph Frederick Sommer, an early developer of endodontics
Regenerative endodontics
Root canal


== References ==


== External links ==


=== Organizations ===
American Association of Endodontists
American Board of Endodontics Archived 2013-02-24 at the Wayback Machine
British Endodontic Society
Canadian Academy of Endodontics
European Society of Endodontology
Indian Association of Conservative Dentistry and Endodontics
International Federation of Endodontic Associations


=== Publications ===
Journal of Endodontics Research (JofER)
International Endodontic Journal

=== Prosthodontics ===
Prosthodontics, also known as dental prosthetics or prosthetic dentistry, is the area of dentistry that focuses on dental prostheses. It is one of 12 dental specialties recognized by the American Dental Association (ADA), Royal College of Surgeons of England, Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh, Royal College of Surgeons of Ireland, Royal College of Surgeons of Glasgow, Royal College of Dentists of Canada, and Royal Australasian College of Dental Surgeons. The ADA defines it as "the dental specialty pertaining to the diagnosis, treatment planning, rehabilitation and maintenance of the oral function, comfort, appearance and health of patients with clinical conditions associated with missing or deficient teeth or oral and maxillofacial tissues using biocompatible substitutes."


== History ==
Pierre Fauchard (died 1761) discovered many methods to replace lost teeth using substitutes made from carved blocks of ivory or bone. He also introduced dental braces to correct the position of teeth using gold wires and silk threads.


=== Women in prosthodontics ===
In 1964 Jeanne Sinkford became the first female prosthodontist with a PhD degree; her degree was in Physiology, and from Northwestern University.
In 1974 Patricia Smathers Moulton became the first woman certified by the American Board of Prosthodontics.
In 1994 Jane D. Brewer became the first female fellow in the Academy of Prosthodontics.
In 2003 Nancy S. Arbree became the first female president of the American College of Prosthodontists, and Rhonda Jacob became the first female American Board of Prosthodontics examiner.
In 2006 Jane D. Brewer became the first female president of the American Academy of Fixed Prosthodontics.
In 2008 Rhonda Jacob became the first female president of the Academy of Prosthodontics, and in 2010 she became the first female president of the American Board of Prosthodontics.


== Training ==
According to the American College of Prosthodontists, a prosthodontist is a dentist who:

Specializes in the aesthetic (cosmetic) restoration and replacement of teeth.
Receives three to four years of additional training after dental school.
Restores optimal appearance and function to one's smile.
The planning, surgical placement (subcrestal prosthodontics) and restoration of implants and rehabilitation of occlusion with prostheses all fall under the field of prosthodontics.
The American College of Prosthodontists (ACP) ensures that standards are maintained in the field. Becoming a prosthodontist requires an additional three years of postgraduate specialty training after obtaining a dental degree. Recently, the ADA's Commission on Dental Accreditation (CODA) passed the updated educational standards for all prosthodontics programs in the United States that now mandates surgical placement of dental implants (subcrestal prosthodontics) at an in-depth competency level (on par with other surgical dental specialties) Training consists of rigorous clinical and didactic preparation in the basic sciences, head and neck anatomy, biomedical sciences, biomaterial sciences, implant surgery, function of occlusion (bite), TMJ, and treatment planning and experience treating full-mouth reconstruction cases, and esthetics. At Ajman University, the Master of Clinical Dentistry in Prosthodontics  follows a similar advanced training model. The program offers a comprehensive three-year curriculum designed to prepare dental professionals for complex prosthodontic cases, including implant placement, occlusion rehabilitation, and esthetic restorations. Due to this extensive training, prosthodontists are required to treat complex cases, full-mouth rehabilitation, TMJ-related disorders, congenital disorders, and sleep apnea by planning and fabricating various prostheses.  There are only 3,200 prosthodontists in comparison to 170,000 general dentists in the United States. Prosthodontists have been consistently ranked at 6th or 7th positions by Forbes among America's most competitive and highest salaried jobs.
Board certification is awarded through the American Board of Prosthodontics (ABP) and requires successful completion of the Part I written examination and Part 2, 3 and 4 oral examinations. The written and one oral examination may be taken during the 3rd year of speciality training and the remaining two oral examinations taken following completion of speciality training. Board eligibility starts when an application is approved by the ABP and lasts for six years. Diplomates of the ABP are ethically required to have a practice limited to prosthodontics. Fellows of the American College of Prosthodontists (FACP) are required to have a dental degree, have completed three years of prosthodontic speciality training, and be board certified by the ABP.
According to the ADA, specialties are recognized in those areas where advanced knowledge and skills are essential to maintain or restore oral health (Principles of Ethics and Code of Professional Conduct). Not all areas in dentistry will satisfy the requirements for specialty recognition. Acknowledged by the profession, the contributions of such and their endeavors are encouraged.
The American Dental Association does not recognize cosmetic dentistry as a speciality. Prosthodontics is the only dental speciality under which the concentration of cosmetic/esthetic dentistry falls. General dentists may perform some simple cosmetic procedures. Consequently, there are questions regarding whether it is ethical for general dentists to treat "smile makeovers" or complex cosmetic and full-mouth reconstruction cases, as they are not qualified to address the complex needs of the patient. Likewise, there is no specialty recognized by the ADA for dental implants.


== Maxillofacial prosthodontics/prosthetics ==
Maxillofacial prosthetics (Oral and Maxillofacial Prosthodontics) is a sub-specialty (or super-specialty) of prosthodontics. All maxillofacial prosthodontists first specialize in prosthodontics and then super-specialize with a one year fellowship exclusively in maxillofacial prosthetics. A fellowship provides intensive clinical, hospital and laboratory training. Maxillofacial prosthodontists treat patients who have acquired and congenital defects of the head and neck and maxillofacial region due to cancer, surgery, trauma, or birth defects. Maxillary obturators, speech-aid prosthesis (formerly called as pharyngeal/soft palate obturators) and mandibular-resection prostheses are the most common intra-oral prostheses planned and fabricated by Maxillofacial prosthodontists. Facial prostheses include artificial eyes, nose, ears and other facial prostheses fabricated by the clinician or in conjunction with an anaplastologist.
Treatment is multidisciplinary, involving oral and maxillofacial surgeons, plastic surgeons, head and neck surgeons, ENT doctors, medical oncologists, radiation oncologists, hospital dentists, speech pathologies (speech therapists), clinical psychologist, occupational therapists, physiotherapists, and other healthcare professionals. The American Academy of Maxillofacial Prosthetics is the academy of this discipline: American Academy of Maxillofacial Prosthetics – AAMP.


== Conditions ==
All-on-4
Bisphosphonate-associated osteonecrosis of the jaw
Bruxism
Edentulism
Occlusal trauma
Temporomandibular joint disorder


== Treatments ==
Bridge
Centric relation
Crown
Veneer
Dental surgery
Complete dentures
Fixed prosthodontics
Inlays and onlays
Removable partial denture
SMK (dentistry)
Implant dentistry
Full mouth rehabilitation


== See also ==


== References ==

=== Glass ionomer cement ===
A glass ionomer cement (GIC) is a dental restorative material used in dentistry as a filling material and luting cement, including for orthodontic bracket attachment. Glass-ionomer cements are based on the reaction of silicate glass-powder (calciumaluminofluorosilicate glass) and polyacrylic acid, an ionomer. Occasionally water is used instead of an acid, altering the properties of the material and its uses. This reaction produces a powdered cement of glass particles surrounded by matrix of fluoride elements and is known chemically as glass polyalkenoate. There are other forms of similar reactions which can take place, for example, when using an aqueous solution of acrylic/itaconic copolymer with tartaric acid, this results in a glass-ionomer in liquid form. An aqueous solution of maleic acid polymer or maleic/acrylic copolymer with tartaric acid can also be used to form a glass-ionomer in liquid form. Tartaric acid plays a significant part in controlling the setting characteristics of the material. Glass-ionomer based hybrids incorporate another dental material, for example resin-modified glass ionomer cements (RMGIC) and compomers (or modified composites).
Non-destructive neutron scattering has evidenced GIC setting reactions to be non-monotonic, with eventual fracture toughness dictated by changing atomic cohesion, fluctuating interfacial configurations and interfacial terahertz (THz) dynamics.
It is on the World Health Organization's List of Essential Medicines.


== Background ==
Glass ionomer cement is primarily used in the prevention of dental caries. This dental material has good adhesive bond properties to tooth structure, allowing it to form a tight seal between the internal structures of the tooth and the surrounding environment. Dental caries is caused by acid, a byproduct of bacterial metabolism of dietary sugars for use as energy. The acid produced from this metabolism results in the breakdown of tooth enamel and subsequent inner structures of the tooth, if the disease is not intervened by a dental professional, or if the carious lesion does not arrest and/or the enamel re-mineralises by itself. Glass ionomer cements act as sealants when pits and fissures in the tooth occur and release fluoride to prevent further enamel demineralisation and promote remineralisation. Fluoride can also hinder bacterial growth, by inhibiting their metabolism of ingested sugars in the diet. It does this by inhibiting various metabolic enzymes within the bacteria. This leads to a reduction in the acid produced during the bacteria's metabolism of fermentable carbohydrates, preventing a further drop in pH and therefore preventing caries.
There is evidence that when using sealants, only 6% of people develop tooth decay over a 2-year period, in comparison to 40% of people when not using a sealant. However, it is recommended that the use of fluoride varnish alongside glass ionomer sealants should be applied in practice to further reduce the risk of secondary dental caries.


=== Resin-modified glass ionomers ===
The addition of resin to glass ionomers improves them significantly, allowing them to be more easily mixed and placed. Resin-modified glass ionomers allow equal or higher fluoride release and there is evidence of higher retention, higher strength and lower solubility. Resin-based glass ionomers have two setting reactions: an acid-base setting and a free-radical polymerisation. The free-radical polymerisation is the predominant mode of setting, as it occurs more rapidly than the acid-base mode. Only the material properly activated by light will be optimally cured. The presence of resin protects the cement from water contamination. Due to the shortened working time, it is recommended that placement and shaping of the material occurs as soon as possible after mixing.


== History ==
Dental sealants were first introduced as part of the preventative programme, in the late 1960s, in response to increasing cases of pits and fissures on occlusal surfaces due to caries. This led to glass ionomer cements to be introduced in 1972 by Wilson and Kent as derivative of the silicate cements and the polycarboxylate cements. The glass ionomer cements incorporated the fluoride releasing properties of the silicate cements with the adhesive qualities of polycarboxylate cements. This incorporation allowed the material to be stronger, less soluble and more translucent (and therefore more aesthetic) than its predecessors.
Glass ionomer cements were initially intended to be used for the aesthetic restoration of anterior teeth and were recommended for restoring Class III and Class V cavity preparations. There have now been further developments in the material's composition to improve properties. For example, the addition of metal or resin particles into the sealant is favoured due to the longer working time and the material being less sensitive to moisture during setting.
When glass ionomer cements were first used, they were mainly used for the restoration of abrasion/erosion lesions and as a luting agent for crown and bridge reconstructions. However, this has now been extended to occlusal restorations in deciduous dentition, restoration of proximal lesions and cavity bases and liners. This is made possible by the ever-increasing new formulations of glass ionomer cements.
One of the early commercially successful GICs, employing G338 glass and developed by Wilson and Kent, served purpose as non-load bearing restorative materials. However, this glass resulted in a cement too brittle for use in load-bearing applications such as in molar teeth. The properties of G338 being shown to be related to its phase-composition, specifically the interplay between its three amorphous phases Ca/Na-Al-Si-O, Ca-Al-F and Ca-P-O-F, as characterised by mechanical testing, differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and X-ray diffraction (XRD), as well as quantum chemical modelling and ab initio molecular dynamics simulations.


== Glass ionomer versus resin-based sealants ==
When the two dental sealants are compared, there has always been a contradiction as to which materials is more effective in caries reduction. Therefore, there are claims against replacing resin-based sealants, the current gold standard, with glass ionomer.


=== Advantages ===
Glass ionomer sealants are thought to prevent caries through a steady fluoride release over a prolonged period and the fissures are more resistant to demineralization, even after the visible loss of sealant material, however, a systemic review found no difference in caries development when GICs was used as a fissure sealing material compared to the conventional resin based sealants, in addition, it has less retention to the tooth structure than the resin based sealants.
These sealants have hydrophilic properties, allowing them to be an alternative of the hydrophobic resin in the generally wet oral cavity. Resin-based sealants are easily destroyed by saliva contamination.
They chemically bond with both enamel and dentin and do not necessarily require preparation/mechanical retention and can therefore be applied without harming existing tooth structure. This makes them ideal in many situations when tooth preservation is foremost and with minimally invasive techniques, particularly Class V fillings where there is a larger area of exposed dentin with only a thin ring of enamel. This often results in longer retention and service life than resin Class V fillings. 
They chemically bond to enamel and dentin leaving a smaller gap for bacteria to enter. Particularly when paired with silver diamine fluoride this can arrest caries and harden active caries and prevent further damage.
Conventional glass ionomer sealants (such as GC Fuji Triage) can be placed and cured outside of clinical settings and do not require a curing light. They typically harden in the mouth within 2 to 6 minutes, at which point they are initially set. Maturation then takes place over the following days and months, becoming harder and reaching maximum compressive strength at roughly one month after placement.
Chemically curable glass ionomer cements are considered safe from allergic reactions but a few have been reported with resin-based materials. Nevertheless, allergic reactions are very rarely associated with both sealants.


=== Disadvantages ===
The main disadvantage of glass ionomer sealants or cements has been inadequate retention or simply lack of strength, toughness, and
limited wear resistance. For instance, due to its poor retention rate, periodic recalls are necessary, even after 6 months, to eventually replace the lost sealant. Different methods have been used to address the physical shortcomings of the glass ionomer cements such as thermo-light curing (polymerization), or addition of the zirconia, hydroxyapatite, N-vinyl pyrrolidone, N-vinyl caprolactam, and fluoroapatite to reinforce the glass ionomer cements.


== Clinical applications ==
Glass ionomers are widely used due to their versatile properties and ease of use. Prior to procedures, starter materials for glass ionomers are supplied as a powder and liquid or as a powder mixed with water. These materials can be mixed and encapsulated.
Preparation of the material should involve following manufacture instructions. A paper pad or cool dry glass slab may be used for mixing the raw materials, though the use of the glass slab will retard the reaction and hence increase the working time. The raw materials in liquid and powder form should not be dispensed onto the chosen surface until the mixture is required in the clinical procedure the glass ionomer is being used for, as a prolonged exposure to the atmosphere could interfere with the ratio of chemicals in the liquid. At the stage of mixing, a spatula should be used to rapidly incorporate the powder into the liquid for a duration of 45–60 seconds depending on manufacture instructions and the individual products.
Once mixed together to form a paste, an acid-base reaction occurs which allows the glass ionomer complex to set over a certain period of time and this reaction involves four overlapping stages:

Dissolution
Gelation
Hardening (3–6 min)
Maturation (24 hr – 1 yr)
Glass ionomers have a long setting time and need protection from the oral environment in order to minimize interference with dissolution and prevent contamination.
The type of application for glass ionomers depends on the cement consistency as varying levels of viscosity from very high viscosity to low viscosity, can determine whether the cement is used as luting agents, orthodontic bracket adhesives, pit and fissure sealants, liners and bases, core build-ups, or intermediate restorations.


=== Clinical uses ===
The different clinical uses of glass ionomer compounds as restorative materials include;

Cermets, which are essentially metal reinforced, glass ionomer cements, used to aid in restoring tooth loss as a result of decay or cavities to the tooth surfaces near the gingival margin, or the tooth roots, though cermets can be incorporated at other sites on various teeth, depending on the function required. They maintain adhesion to enamel and dentine and have an identical setting reaction to other glass ionomers. The development of cermets is an attempt to improve the mechanical properties of glass ionomers, particularly brittleness and abrasion resistance by incorporating metals such as silver, tin, gold and titanium. The use of these materials with glass ionomers appears to increase the value of compressive strength and fatigue limit as compared to conventional glass ionomer, however there is no marked difference in the flexural strength and resistance to abrasive wear as compared to glass ionomers.
Dentine surface treatment, which can be performed with glass ionomer cements as the cement has adhesive characteristics which may be useful when placed in undercut cavities. The surfaces on which the glass cement ionomers are placed would be adequately prepared by removing the precipitated salivary proteins, present from saliva as this would greatly reduce the receptiveness of the glass ionomer cement and dentine surface, to bond formation. A number of different substances can be used to remove this element, such as citric acid, however the most effective substance seems to be polyacrylic acid, which is applied to the tooth surface for 30 seconds before it is washed off. The tooth is then dried to ensure the surface is receptive to bond formation but care is taken to ensure desiccation does not occur.
Matrix techniques with glass ionomers, which are used to aid in proximal cavity restorations of anterior teeth. Between the teeth that are adjacent to the cavity, the matrix is inserted, commonly before any dentine surface conditioning. Once the material is inserted in excess, the matrix is placed around the tooth root and kept in place with the help of firm digital pressure while the material sets. Once set, the matrix can be carefully removed using a sharp probe or excavator.
Fissure sealants, which involve the use of glass ionomers as the materials can be mixed to achieve a certain fluid consistency and viscosity that allows the cement to sink into fissures and pits located in posterior teeth and fill these spaces which pose as a site for caries risk, thereby reducing the risk of caries manifesting.
Orthodontic brackets, which can involve the use of glass ionomer cements as an adhesive cement that forms strong chemical bonds between the enamel and the many metals which are used in orthodontic brackets such as stainless steel.
Fluoride varnishes have been combined with sealant application in the prevention of dental caries. There is low certainty evidence that the combined usage of both increases the overall effectiveness as compared to using fluoride varnish alone.


== Chemistry and setting reaction ==
All GICs contain a basic glass and an acidic polymer liquid, which set by an acid-base reaction. The polymer is an ionomer, containing a small proportion – some 5 to 10% – of substituted ionic groups. These allow it to be acid decomposable and clinically set readily.
The glass filler is generally a calcium alumino fluorosilicate powder, which upon reaction with a polyalkenoic acid gives a glass polyalkenoate-glass residue set in an ionised, polycarboxylate matrix.
The acid base setting reaction begins with the mixing of the components. The first phase of the reaction involves dissolution. The acid begins to attack the surface of the glass particles, as well as the adjacent tooth substrate, thus precipitating their outer layers but also neutralising itself. As the pH of the aqueous solution rises, the polyacrylic acid begins to ionise, and becoming negatively charged it sets up a diffusion gradient and helps draw cations out of the glass and dentine. The alkalinity also induces the polymers to dissociate, increasing the viscosity of the aqueous solution.
The second phase is gelation, where as the pH continues to rise and the concentration of the ions in solution to increase, a critical point is reached and insoluble polyacrylates begin to precipitate. These polyanions have carboxylate groups whereby cations bind them, especially Ca2+ in this early phase, as it is the most readily available ion, crosslinking into calcium polyacrylate chains that begin to form a gel matrix, resulting in the initial hard set, within five minutes. Crosslinking, H bonds and physical entanglement of the chains are responsible for gelation. During this phase, the GIC is still vulnerable and must be protected from moisture. If contamination occurs, the chains will degrade and the GIC lose its strength and optical properties. Conversely, dehydration early on will crack the cement and make the surface porous.
Over the next twenty four hours maturation occurs. The less stable calcium polyacrylate chains are progressively replaced by aluminium polyacrylate, allowing the calcium to join the fluoride and phosphate and diffuse into the tooth substrate, forming polysalts, which progressively hydrate to yield a physically stronger matrix.
The incorporation of fluoride delays the reaction, increasing the working time. Other factors are the temperature of the cement, and the powder to liquid ratio – more powder or heat speeding up the reaction.
GICs have good adhesive relations with tooth substrates, uniquely chemically bonding to dentine and, to a lesser extend, to enamel. During initial dissolution, both the glass particles and the hydroxyapatite structure are affected, and thus as the acid is buffered the matrix reforms, chemically welded together at the interface into a calcium phosphate polyalkenoate bond. In addition, the polymer chains are incorporated into both, weaving cross links, and in dentine the collagen fibres also contribute, both linking physically and H-bonding to the GIC salt precipitates. There is also microretention from porosities occurring in the hydroxyapatite.
Works employing non-destructive neutron scattering and terahertz (THz) spectroscopy have evidenced that GIC's developing fracture toughness during setting is related to interfacial THz dynamics, changing atomic cohesion and fluctuating interfacial configurations. Setting of GICs is non-monotonic, characterised by abrupt features, including a glass–polymer coupling point, an early setting point, where decreasing toughness unexpectedly recovers, followed by stress-induced weakening of interfaces. Subsequently, toughness declines asymptotically to long-term fracture test values.


== Glass ionomer cement as a permanent material ==


=== Fluoride release and remineralisation ===
The pattern of fluoride release from glass ionomer cement is characterised by an initial rapid release of appreciable amounts of fluoride, followed by a taper in the release rate over time.  An initial fluoride "burst" effect is desirable to reduce the viability of remaining bacteria in the inner carious dentin, hence, inducing enamel or dentin remineralization.  The constant fluoride release during the following days are attributed to the fluoride ability to diffuse through cement pores and fractures. Thus, continuous small amounts of fluoride surrounding the teeth reduces demineralization of the tooth tissues. A study by Chau et al. shows a negative correlation between acidogenicity of the biofilm and the fluoride release by GIC, suggestive that enough fluoride release may decrease the virulence of cariogenic biofilms.  In addition, Ngo et al. (2006) studied the interaction between demineralised dentine and Fuji IX GP which includes a strontium – containing glass as opposed to the more conventional calcium-based glass in other GICs. A substantial amount of both strontium and fluoride ions was found to cross the interface into the partially demineralised dentine affected by caries. This promoted mineral depositions in these areas where calcium ion levels were low. Hence, this study supports the idea of glass ionomers contributing directly to remineralisation of carious dentine, provided that good seal is achieved with intimate contact between the GIC and partly demineralised dentine. This, then raises a question, "Is glass ionomer cement a suitable material for permanent restorations?" due to the desirable effects of fluoride release by glass ionomer cement.


=== Glass Ionomer Cement in Primary Teeth ===
Numerous studies and reviews have been published with respect to GIC used in primary teeth restorations. Findings of a systematic review and meta-analysis suggested that conventional glass ionomers were not recommended for Class II restorations in primary molars.  This material showed poor anatomical form and marginal integrity, and composite restorations were shown to be more successful than GIC when good moisture control could be achieved.  Resin modified glass ionomer cements (RMGIC) were developed to overcome the limitations of the conventional glass ionomer as a restorative material. A systematic review supports the use of RMGIC in small to moderate sized class II cavities, as they are able to withstand the occlusal forces on primary molars for at least one year.  With their desirable fluoride releasing effect, RMGIC may be considered for Class I and Class II restorations of primary molars in high caries risk population.


=== Glass Ionomer Cement in Permanent Teeth ===
With regard to permanent teeth, there is insufficient evidence to support the use of RMGIC as long term restorations in permanent teeth. Despite the low number of randomised control trials, a meta- analysis review by Bezerra et al. [2009] reported significantly fewer carious lesions on the margins of glass ionomer restorations in permanent teeth after six years as compared to amalgam restorations.  In addition, adhesive ability and longevity of GIC from a clinical standpoint can be best studied with restoration of non- carious cervical lesions. A systematic review shows GIC has higher retention rates than resin composite in follow up periods of up to 5 years. Unfortunately, reviews for Class II restorations in permanent teeth with glass ionomer cement are scarce with high bias or short study periods. However, a study  [2003] of the compressive strength and the fluoride release was done on 15 commercial fluoride- releasing restorative materials. A negative linear correlation was found between the compressive strength and fluoride release (r2=0.7741), i.e., restorative materials with high fluoride release have lower mechanical properties.



=== Tooth morphology and development ===
Tooth formation involves the interaction of the dental epithelium and ectomesenchyme through successive developmental stages. The main stages of tooth development are the bud, cap and bell stages, followed by apposition and mineralization. The developing tooth germ consists of the enamel organ, dental papilla and dental follicle. The dental papilla gives rise to the dentin and dental pulp, while the enamel organ gives rise to enamel. Tooth morphology and the number and arrangement of developmental lobes contribute to the final anatomical form of the crown.

=== Dental papilla and nerve development ===
The dental papilla is the ectomesenchymal tissue located beneath the developing enamel organ. It gives rise to odontoblasts and subsequently to dentin, while the remaining central tissue forms the dental pulp. During tooth development, nerve fibers approach the developing dental papilla as the tooth germ progresses through its developmental stages. Neural development is closely associated with the maturation of the dental pulp and the differentiation of odontoblasts.

=== Mandibular movements and muscles ===
Movement of the mandible is produced by the muscles of mastication. The temporalis, masseter and medial pterygoid muscles are primarily elevators of the mandible, while the lateral pterygoid contributes to protrusion and assists in depression of the mandible. The temporalis muscle also contributes to retrusion or retraction of the mandible, particularly through its posterior fibers. The medial pterygoid contributes to elevation and assists in protrusion and lateral movements. The lateral pterygoid is an important muscle in mandibular protrusion and opening movements.

=== Root canal instruments ===
Endodontic instruments are used for exploration, cleaning, shaping and enlargement of the root canal system. Common hand instruments include broaches, files and reamers. A broach is primarily used for extirpation of pulp tissue and is not designed as the principal instrument for canal enlargement. Files are used for cleaning and shaping the walls of the root canal and can be used with filing and related movements. Reamers are primarily designed for enlargement and shaping of the root canal using a rotational cutting action. The selection and use of an instrument depends on the canal anatomy, size, curvature and stage of instrumentation.

=== Root canal treatment ===
Root canal treatment involves the removal of diseased or infected pulp, shaping of the root canal system, cleaning and disinfection, and filling and sealing of the prepared canal. The tooth is normally isolated using a rubber dam during treatment to prevent contamination by saliva and to protect the patient from instruments and irrigating solutions. Endodontic instruments are used progressively to establish a suitable canal shape for irrigation and obturation. Instrument separation is a recognized procedural complication and prevention requires appropriate instrument selection, controlled use and attention to canal anatomy.

=== Zinc oxide eugenol cement ===
Zinc oxide eugenol (ZOE) materials are used in dentistry for temporary restorations, bases, liners, impression materials and other applications depending on their formulation. The basic setting reaction involves zinc oxide reacting with eugenol to form zinc eugenolate. Various modifiers may be incorporated into ZOE formulations to alter setting time, consistency, flow and handling characteristics. Oils and plasticizing agents can be added to modify the physical properties of the paste. Lanolin may be incorporated into some ZOE formulations as a plasticizing or modifying ingredient and can influence the handling characteristics of the material.

=== Zinc oxide eugenol and pulp effects ===
Eugenol-containing materials have historically been used because of their sedative effect on the dental pulp and their usefulness in temporary restorative procedures. However, eugenol-containing materials can interfere with the polymerization of resin-based materials. For this reason, zinc oxide eugenol is generally avoided beneath resin composite restorations when it may come into direct contact with the resin. Composite restoration procedures require appropriate bonding and isolation to obtain reliable adhesion.

=== Dental extraction and mandibular third molars ===
Mandibular third molar extraction may be associated with complications related to the position of the tooth, its roots, surrounding bone and adjacent anatomical structures. Complications include postoperative pain, swelling, bleeding, infection and dry socket. Surgical extraction of impacted mandibular third molars can also cause displacement of the tooth or tooth fragments into adjacent anatomical spaces if excessive or uncontrolled force is used. Distal and angular impactions may require careful assessment of the relationship between the third molar, the ramus, the second molar and the lingual tissues before surgical removal.

=== Dry socket ===
Alveolar osteitis, commonly known as dry socket, is a painful postoperative complication that may occur following extraction. It is associated with loss or breakdown of the blood clot within the extraction socket, leaving the underlying bone exposed. Patients commonly present with increasing pain after an initial period of improvement, often accompanied by an unpleasant taste or odor. Management is primarily supportive and may include irrigation of the socket and placement of an appropriate dressing together with analgesia.

=== Oral pathology ===
Median rhomboid glossitis is a lesion occurring on the dorsal surface of the tongue, typically in the midline anterior to the circumvallate papillae. It presents as a well-defined, smooth or depapillated erythematous area due to loss of filiform papillae. The condition has been associated with Candida infection and may occur with other manifestations of oral candidiasis. The lesion is usually asymptomatic, although some patients may report burning or discomfort.

=== Oral candidiasis ===
Candida species are opportunistic fungi that can colonize the oral cavity. Oral candidiasis can present in several forms including pseudomembranous candidiasis, erythematous candidiasis and chronic hyperplastic candidiasis. Predisposing factors include immunosuppression, diabetes, antibiotic use, corticosteroid use and denture wearing. Median rhomboid glossitis has a recognized association with Candida infection and is considered by many sources to represent a form of chronic erythematous candidal infection.

=== Periodontal instrumentation ===
Scaling and root planing require instruments with cutting edges designed to adapt to the tooth surface and remove calculus and contaminated root surface deposits. Curettes are commonly used for subgingival instrumentation because their blade can be adapted to the root surface while minimizing unnecessary tissue trauma. The working end of a curette is positioned so that the lower cutting edge is adapted to the tooth surface. Proper angulation is essential for effective calculus removal and root planing. Incorrect angulation can result in ineffective instrumentation or unnecessary removal of root structure and soft tissue.

=== Dental hand instrument angulation ===
Dental hand instruments are designed according to standardized formulas that describe blade dimensions and angles. The cutting edge must be correctly adapted to the tooth surface to allow efficient cutting or planing. In periodontal instrumentation, the relationship between the face of the blade and the tooth surface determines the working angle. A correct working angulation allows the cutting edge to engage deposits effectively while reducing unnecessary trauma to the root and periodontal tissues.

=== Intraosseous anesthesia ===
Intraosseous anesthesia is a technique in which local anesthetic solution is deposited directly into cancellous bone adjacent to the tooth to be anesthetized. It can be useful when conventional local anesthesia is inadequate or when profound anesthesia of a specific tooth is required. The perforation is generally made through the cortical plate into cancellous bone, followed by deposition of a small volume of anesthetic solution. The location of the perforation depends on the tooth being treated and the available anatomy. For mandibular molars, the injection site is selected in relation to the roots and surrounding cortical bone while avoiding important anatomical structures.

=== Dental restorative materials ===
Restorative materials used in dentistry include dental amalgam, resin-based composite, glass ionomer cement, resin-modified glass ionomer and other tooth-colored restorative materials. The selection of a restorative material depends on the location and size of the restoration, functional loading, esthetic requirements, moisture control and the remaining tooth structure. Resin-based composites provide excellent esthetics and bond to tooth structure through adhesive techniques. Dental amalgam has historically been widely used for posterior restorations because of its strength, durability and relative tolerance to moisture during placement.

=== Resin-based composite properties ===
Resin-based composites are composed primarily of a resin matrix and inorganic filler particles. Common resin matrices include Bis-GMA and UDMA, while fillers may include silica, glass or ceramic particles. The filler contributes to strength, wear resistance, reduced polymerization shrinkage and improved optical properties. A coupling agent such as silane promotes bonding between the inorganic filler and resin matrix. Photoinitiators such as camphorquinone initiate polymerization when exposed to appropriate visible light.

=== Light curing of composite ===
Light-cured resin composites contain a photoinitiator system that initiates polymerization when exposed to light of an appropriate wavelength. The curing light is commonly positioned as close as practical to the composite surface to maximize the amount of light reaching the material. Light penetration is limited, therefore deep restorations should be placed and cured in appropriate increments. Inadequate curing can leave partially polymerized material and may compromise the mechanical properties, marginal integrity and longevity of the restoration.

=== Composite placement and sensitivity ===
Successful placement of a resin composite restoration requires adequate moisture control, appropriate bonding procedures and sufficient polymerization. Composite should generally be placed in increments when the depth of the restoration exceeds the effective depth of light penetration. Each increment should be adequately cured before placement of the next increment. Postoperative sensitivity may occur when the restoration is improperly bonded, when there are problems at the gingival margin, when polymerization is inadequate or when the occlusion is excessive. Proper cavity preparation, adhesive technique, incremental placement and curing are important for reducing postoperative complications.

=== Composite Class II restorations ===
Class II composite restorations involve the proximal surfaces of posterior teeth and require careful control of moisture, matrix adaptation, contact formation, bonding and polymerization. Modern resin composites can be used successfully for Class II restorations, although technique sensitivity is greater than for some other restorative procedures. Deep or large restorations should be placed in appropriate increments and each increment should be adequately polymerized. A properly adjusted occlusion is important because excessive occlusal contact can contribute to postoperative chewing sensitivity.

=== Composite versus amalgam ===
Composite restorations have an important esthetic advantage over amalgam because they can be closely matched to natural tooth color. Composite also allows more conservative tooth preparation because retention can be obtained through adhesive bonding rather than extensive mechanical undercuts. However, composite placement is more technique-sensitive and requires effective moisture control. Amalgam has historically been widely used for posterior restorations because of its strength and relative tolerance to moisture. High-copper amalgam alloys have improved mechanical properties and reduced formation of the weak gamma-2 phase.

=== Dental amalgam ===
Dental amalgam is produced by combining liquid mercury with an alloy containing metals such as silver, tin and copper. It is primarily used as a direct restorative material, historically especially for posterior teeth. The amalgamation reaction produces a workable mass that can be condensed into a prepared cavity and subsequently hardens. Amalgam does not intrinsically bond to tooth structure and therefore traditional amalgam preparations depend on mechanical retention. High-copper amalgams have greater strength, improved corrosion resistance and reduced creep compared with conventional low-copper amalgams.

=== High copper amalgam ===
High-copper amalgam alloys were developed to improve the properties of conventional amalgam. Increasing the copper content reduces or eliminates the formation of the gamma-2 phase, which is the weakest and most corrosion-prone phase of conventional amalgam. High-copper amalgams demonstrate improved strength, lower creep, improved corrosion resistance and better marginal integrity. These properties contributed to the widespread replacement of traditional low-copper amalgam alloys by high-copper formulations.

=== Dental composite handling characteristics ===
Resin composites can be classified according to their handling characteristics into universal, flowable and packable types. Universal composites are intended for general restorative applications. Flowable composites have lower viscosity and can adapt closely to cavity walls and small irregularities, but generally have lower filler loading and greater polymerization shrinkage than more heavily filled materials. Packable composites have higher viscosity and filler content and were developed particularly for posterior applications. Their handling characteristics are more similar to amalgam than those of flowable composites.

=== Endodontic anesthesia and isolation ===
Before root canal treatment, local anesthesia is used to provide pain control and the tooth is isolated with a rubber dam. Rubber dam isolation helps prevent salivary contamination of the root canal system and protects the patient from instruments and irrigating solutions. Local anesthetic techniques may vary according to the tooth, pulpal diagnosis and individual patient anatomy. Additional anesthetic techniques may be required when conventional anesthesia does not provide adequate pulpal anesthesia.

=== Dental anatomy of the mandible ===
The mandible is the largest and strongest bone of the facial skeleton and contains the teeth within its alveolar process. Important anatomical regions include the body, ramus, angle, coronoid process and condylar process. The muscles of mastication attach to different regions of the mandible and produce elevation, depression, protrusion, retrusion and lateral movements. Knowledge of mandibular anatomy is essential for local anesthesia, oral surgery, extraction procedures and interpretation of dental radiographs.



== References ==


== Further reading ==
Anusavice KJ, Ralph W. Phillips, Chiayi Shen, H. Ralph Rawls (2013). Phillips' Science of Dental Materials (12th ed.). St. Louis, Mo.: Elsevier/Saunders. ISBN 978-1-4377-2418-9. OCLC 785080357.
McCabe JF, Angus W. G. Walls (2008). Applied Dental Materials (9th ed.). Oxford, UK: Blackwell Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4051-3961-8. OCLC 180080871. Retrieved 28 March 2013.
Van Noort R (2013). "2.3 Glass-ionomer cements and resin-modified glass-ionomer cements". An Introduction to Dental Materials (4th ed.). London: Elsevier/Mosby. pp. 95–106. ISBN 978-0-7234-3659-1. OCLC 821697096.
Powers JM, John C. Wataha (2013). Dental Materials: Properties and Manipulation (10th ed.). St. Louis, Mo.: Elsevier/Mosby. ISBN 978-0-323-07836-8. OCLC 794161326.
Wilson AD, J. W. Nicholson (2005) [1993]. "5.9 Glass polyalkenoate (glass-ionomer) cement". Acid-Base Cements: Their Biomedical and Industrial Applications. Chemistry of Solid State Materials 3 (reprint ed.). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. pp. 116–196. ISBN 978-0-521-67549-9. OCLC 749544621. Retrieved 28 March 2013.
Wilson AD, John W. McLean (1988). Glass-ionomer Cement. Chicago: Quintessence Publishing Company. ISBN 978-0-86715-200-5. OCLC 17300425.
